

--- FILE: Chapter01_Introduction.pptx ---
Dec  16 th ,  2024 Database Management System
Exercise 1.2 Specify whether each system would be single-tiered, two-tiered, or three-tiered. a. The Happy Nights motel chain allows local managers to purchase a franchise. They can install and use the DBMS of their choice for their reservation system. The only requirement is that they be able to connect and communicate with the central office’s system. b. The Sticky Wicket Company has home offices in Detroit and branches in Chicago and Baltimore. The inventory and parts database is distributed with each branch keeping its own inventory. One central DBMS located in Detroit allows instant ordering of supplies through the central office.
Three-tier architecture: Distributed Database Systems A distributed database system
Structure Data 12 20% Sensors Weblogs Financial Systems Name & Personal Details
Three-tiered  client/server  database architecture
Three-tier architecture c. Three-tier: Two kings of DBMS Connected by Middleware DBMS I Server Software Database Middleware Application #1 Application #2 DBMS II Server Software Database Application #3 Applicatio4 #3 Front-End/Client Front-End/Client
Client/Server (Two tier ) DBMS manages data resources like an operating system manages hardware resources DBMS Server  Software Database containing centralized  shared data Application #1 Application #2 Application #3 Front-End/Client Two-Tier: Server with many clients Back-End/Server
DBMS Software Database a. Single tier: All on one machine  Access by terminals Single tier
Desktop database System Different Types of Database System Centralized database System Distributed database System
Database System Architecture A- Single tier Architecture( also call Desktop Application) B- Two-tier Architecture (Client/Server) C- Three-tier Architecture(Distributed database system) There are three type as following
End of Chapter 1
What is structured data? 11 Structured data  is generally tabular data that is represented by columns and rows in a database. Databases that hold tables in this form are called  relational databases . The mathematical term “ relation”  specify to a formed set of data held as a table. In structured data, all row in a table has the same set of columns . Relational databases  are easily-queried datasets. They allow users to find external information and either study it standalone or integrate it with their internal data for more context. Relational database management systems use SQL, or Structured Query Language, to access data, providing a uniform language across a network of data platforms and sources.
What is big data? Big  data   is term for a collection of data sets so  l arge and complex that it become difficult to store and process using on-hand database management tools or traditional data processing applications 10 Structured Data Unstructured data Semi-Structured Data Big data is classified in three ways:
Who am I? PRUM Chan  Samedy E-mail: chansamedy@gmail.com Mobile Phone:   069-999-733                              012 456-896  More than 20 years of professional working experience as database programming  trainer  Software Development IT  Services
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves  both create structure for storage of information and providing  mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as  following:   Employees list Student list Hotel Management Billing system Inventory System Payroll system, etc.
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both create structure for storage of information and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as following: 
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both create structure for storage of information and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as using SQL language.
  Fundamental of  		 Database systems,   		 Elmasri  &  Navatthe 	 Class References
Chapter 1:  Introduction
Outline Basic Definitions Advantages of Using the Database Approach Database Users Different Types of Database System
Data VS Information What is data? Data  is any fact that needs to be stored.   INFORMATION  is    Data presented in a form suitable for interpretation.  Data is converted into information by programs and  queries(process) . Process e.g :    employeename , Sex, Position, Phone, address, shift Branch, and hired date in an Employee Information.
RDBMS Relational Database Management System (RDBMS)  Relational Database is  a collection of relations (table)  Oracle, SQL Server, DB2, My SQL,… User tables Data  dictionary
Also call Distributed Systems Solutions are distributed between client PC’s and one or more servers. Three-tier architecture
Database Users-3 	 They access the data from programs written in high-level language such as Visual basic or C++,C#, Java. The application programmers design systems such as payroll, Inventory, and billing. End user 	 They use the data for queries, reports and some of them update the database content. Application programmer/Application      Developer
21
Introduction to big data Example of big data Unit Value Example Kilobytes (KB) 1,000 bytes a paragraph of a text document Megabytes (MB) 1,000 Kilobytes a small novel Gigabytes (GB) 1,000 Megabytes Beethoven’s 5th Symphony Terabytes (TB) 1,000 Gigabytes all the X-rays in a large hospital Petabytes (PB) 1,000 Terabytes half the contents of all US academic research libraries Exabytes (EB)  1,000 Petabytes about one fifth of the words people have ever spoken Zettabytes (ZB) 1,000 Exabytes as much information as there are grains of sand on all the world’s beaches Yottabytes (YB) 1,000 Zettabytes as much information as there are atoms in 7,000 human bodies  20
Structured Data vs Unstructured Data vs Semi-Structured: Structured data  is stored is predefined format and is highly specific; whereas  unstructured data  is a collection of many varied data types which are stored in their native formats; while  semi structured data  that does not follow the tabular data structure models associated with relational databases or other data table forms.
Exercise 1.1 Indicate which type of user would perform the following functions for a payroll system in a large company: Write an application program to generate and print the checks. Change the address in the database for an employee who has moved. Create a new user account for a newly hired payroll clerk.
SEMI-STRUCTURED DATA Semi-structured  data is information that doesn’t consist of Structured data (relational database) but still has some structure to it. Semi-structured data consist of documents held in  JavaScript Object Notation  (JSON) format . It also includes  key-value  stores and  graph  databases. https://k21academy.com/microsoft-azure/dp-900/azure-data-fundamentals-exam-questions/ Read this link:   Microsoft DP-900 Exam questions and answers
16 Structured Vs Unstructured  Data   Structured data is generally tabular data that is represented by columns and rows in a database and Unstructured data is information that either does not organize in a pre-defined manner or not have a pre-defined data model.
15 Structured Vs Unstructured  Data Structured data is generally tabular data that is represented by columns and rows in a database and Unstructured data is information that either does not organize in a pre-defined manner or not have a pre-defined data model.
U nstructured Data 14 8 0% Satellite Images Scientific Data Radar Data Name & Personal Details
unstructured Data 13 Unstructured data  is information that either does not organize in a pre-defined manner or not have a pre-defined data model. Unstructured information is a set of text-heavy but may contain data such as numbers, dates, and facts as well. Videos, audio, and binary  data files might not have a specific structure. They’re assigned to as  unstructured  data.
Why every employees in company need  information ? Shopping in supermarket All manager need information for decision making.
SEMI-STRUCTURED DATA
Graphical displays turn data into useful information that managers can use for decision making and interpretation Why every employees in company need information?
Basic Definitions –  Metadata  Metadata:  “Data about data” Description of fields Display and format instructions Structure of files and tables Security and access rules Triggers and operational rules . Descriptions of the properties or characteristics of the data, including data types, field sizes, allowable values, and data context.
Database application program A software program that interacts with the database by issuing an appropriate request (typically an SQL statement) to the DBMS. A simplified database system environment 
Database Users-1 Users may be divided into Those who actually use and control the database content, and those who design, develop and maintain database applications (called “Actors on the Scene”), and Those who design and develop the DBMS software and related tools, and the computer systems operators (called “Workers Behind the Scene”).
Database Users-2 Actors on the scene Database administrators: Responsible for authorizing access to the database, for coordinating and monitoring its use, acquiring software and hardware resources, controlling its use and monitoring efficiency of operations. Database Designers: Responsible to define the content, the structure, the constraints, and functions or transactions against the database. They must communicate with the end-users and understand their needs.
Basic Definitions – Database System DATABASE SYSTEM: Database System  = DBMS+Database The DBMS software together with the data itself.  Sometimes, the applications are also included:  	 Oracle Corporation- Oracle, MySQL Microsoft -  Access, SQL Server IBM – DB2,  MangoDB , PostgreSQ ,…
Basic Definitions – Sample of Metadata Sample of Metadata
Database Overview-  Why Use a DBMS? Using a DBMS to manage data has many advantages: Unlimited Data storage Provide Multiple user can c oncurrent ly  access  Data integrity  Data administration  Reduced application development time Backup and  crash recovery
Basic Definitions – Database VS DBMS - DATABASE :  Database: organized collection of logically related data. - DBMS  is a software system that is used to create, maintain, and provide controlled access to user databases DBMS Server  Software Database containing centralized  shared data Application #1 Application #2 Application #3 Front-End/Client Back-End/Server
DBMS Industry User tables Data  dictionary Oracle Corporation- Oracle, MySQL Microsoft -  Access, SQL Server IBM – DB2,  MongoDB , PostgreSQL ,…

--- FILE: Chapter01_Normaliation.pptx ---
Apri  1 th , 2026 Advance Database System
Who am I? PRUM  Chansamedy E-mail: chansamedy@gmail.com Mobile Phone:  069-999-733    	          ​​​		 012 456-896 https://www.youtube.com/@samedyprum4956  More than 29 years of professional working experience as database programming  trainer  Software Development IT Services
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves  both create structure for storage of information and providing  mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as  following:   Employees list Student list Hotel Management Billing system Inventory System Payroll system, etc.
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both create structure for storage of information and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as following: 
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both create structure for storage of information and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as using SQL language.
Software Taught Visible Analyst (CASE Tool) DBMS with Oracle, and MS-Access use for graphic user interface(GUI)
Lecturer: Mr.  Prum  Chan  Samedy ,  MScIT Tel: 069 999-733 E-mail: chansamedy@gmail.com Bachelor  of Science in Information Technology Chapter 1: Database Design
Understanding DBMS Key What are Keys? A DBMS key is an attribute or set of an attribute which helps you to identify a row(tuple) in a relation(table). They allow you to find the relation between two tables. Keys help you uniquely identify a row in a table by a combination of one or more columns in that table Example: Various Keys in Database Management System DBMS has following seven types of Keys each have their different functionality: Candidate Key Primary Key Foreign Key In the above-given example, employee ID is a primary key because it uniquely identifies an employee record. In this table, no other employee can have the same employee ID.
Understanding DBMS Key A  primary key  is a special relational database table column (or combination of columns) designated to uniquely identify all table records. A primary key is used as a unique identifier to quickly parse data within the database and find the relation between different tables. A relational database cannot have more than one primary key. Candidate Keys :  Any field that could serve as a primary key is called a candidate key.  The Primary key should be selected from the candidate keys. Every table must have at least a single candidate key. A table can have multiple candidate keys but only a single primary key.
Understanding DBMS Key A  primary key  is a special relational database table column (or combination of columns) designated to uniquely identify all table records. A primary key is used as a unique identifier to quickly parse data within the database and find the relation between different tables. A relational database cannot have more than one primary key. Candidate Keys :  Any field that could serve as a primary key is called a candidate key.  The Primary key should be selected from the candidate keys. Every table must have at least a single candidate key. A table can have multiple candidate keys but only a single primary key.
Understanding DBMS Key:  Primary key and Foreign key A primary key’s main features are: It must contain a unique value for each row of data. It cannot contain null values. Every row must have a primary key value. Foreign Keys Foreign Keys:  A foreign key is a field in one table  that must match a primary key value in another  table  in order  to establish the relationship between  the two tables.  Primary Keys
  12 Lab:  Primary key and Foreign key
  13 Lab:  Primary key and Foreign key Field Properties: Default Value: =Date()
  14 Lab:  Primary key and Foreign key StudentID   នៅក្នុង  Table:  TblPayment   គេអោយឈ្មោះថា  Foreign Key  មានន័យថាបញ្ចូលតម្លៃ  Foreign key  គឺយើងអាចស្គាល់តម្លៃរប់ស់  Primary key ( StudentID )  ក្នុង តារាងដើម(​ Primary table) ។​ មានន័យថាបញ្ចូល លេខកូដនិស្សិត លេខ១ អ្នកអាចឃើញនូវ ឈ្មោះ ភេទ ផ្នែក  ….
Primary key-Single Column Primary  key
Primary key- Multies  Column លក្ខខ័ណ្ឌះ   មុខវិជ្ជាមួយអាចផ្តល់អោយសិស្សច្រើននាក់​សិក្សាបាន។ ចំពោះនិស្សិត ម្នាក់ៗអាចសិក្សាបានច្រើនមុខវិជ្ចា តែមិនអាចសិក្សាមុខវិជ្ចាដដែលៗបានទេ។ Message  Box  Error  ដោយសារតែមានការបញ្ជូល​និស្សិត ដែល​​មានលេខសំគាល់ លេខ១ សិក្សាមុខវិជ្ចា  DB  ដដែលៗ។ 
Primary key- Multies  Column
Primary key: Lab01 =Date( )
Primary key: Lab01 [ Qty ]*[Price] ភ្ជាប់ទំនាកទំនង Define  Relationship   =Date()
  21
  22
  23
  24 Practical learning with setting primary key =Date()
ត្រង់  Column:  CustomerID_SoldTo សូម  Lookup  តំលៃ   CustomerName ពី Table:  Customer 1 2 3 =Date() Practical learning with setting primary key
ត្រង់  Column:  CustomerID_SoldTo សូម  Lookup  តំលៃ   CustomerName ពី Table:  Customer 1 2 3 =Date() =[ Qty ]*[Price]
Normalization When designing database you are faced with a series of choices. How many table will there be and will they represent? Which columns will go in which tables? What the relationships between the tables be? The answer  each to these question lies in something called Normalization.   A technique for producing a set of tables with desirable properties that support the requirements of a user or company.   31
Data redundancy and update anomalies Major aim of relational database design is to group columns into tables to minimize data redundancy and reduce file storage space required by base tables. Problems associated with data redundancy are illustrated by comparing the Staff and Branch tables with the  StaffBranch  table.   32 Table:  StaffBranch StaffBranch  table has redundant data,  the details of a branch are repeated for every member of staff.
Data redundancy and update anomalies   33 Staff Branch Table:  StaffBranch In contrast, the branch information appears only once for each branch in the Branch table and only the branch number ( branchNo ) is repeated in the Staff table, to represent where each member of staff is located.
Data redundancy: Solution
Data redundancy: Solution
Report Output Data redundancy: Solution and result
The Normal Forms A series of logical steps to take to normalize data tables First Normal Form Second Third There’s more, but beyond scope of this
First Normal Form (1NF) First Normal Form (1NF) says that all column values not  contains multi value and not allow repeating group. Note:  this state a relation all underlying domains compulsorily contain atomic values only   41
Converting Branch table to 1NF
Converting Branch table to 1NF   43
Example of 1NF ( NOT 1NF)   44 Research				5		333445555       { Koh  Kong,  Kandal , Phnom Penh} Administration			4		987654321       { Kandal } Headquarters			1		888665555       { Phnom Penh } DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS Department DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS Research			5			333445555	 	Phnom Penh Research			5			333445555	 	Kandal Research			5			333445555	 	Koh Kong Administration		4			987654321	 	Kandal Headquarters		1			888665555	 	Phnom Penh (A)  Not in 1NF because relation with multi value attribute.   (B) Not in 1NF because relation with redundancy (Repeating Group).   (A) (B) Department
Normalization: 1NF -Example DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID Research 5 333445555 Administration 4 987654321 Headquarters 1 888665555 DNUMBER DLOCATIONS 1			Phnom Penh 4			Phnom Penh 5			 Koh  Kong 5			 Kandal 5			Phnom Penh DEPT_LOCATIONS  DEPARTMENT  1NF NORMALIZATION   DEPARTMENT relation schemas normalize into NF relations: DEPARTMENT and DEPT_LOCATIONS. DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS Research				5		333445555		Phnom Penh Research				5		333445555		Kandal Research				5		333445555		 Koh Kong Administration			4		987654321	 	Phnom Penh Headquarters			1		888665555		 Phnom Penh
Normalization: 1NF -Example DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID Research 5 333445555 Administration 4 987654321 Headquarters 1 888665555   46 DEPT_LOCATIONS  DEPARTMENT  1NF NORMALIZATION   DEPARTMENT relation schemas normalize into two 1NF relations: DEPARTMENT and DEPT_LOCATIONS. Research				5		333445555       { Koh  Kong,  Kandal , Phnom Penh} Administration			4		987654321       { Kandal } Headquarters			1		888665555       { Phnom Penh } DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS DNUMBER DLOCATIONS 1		Phnom Penh 4		Kandal 5		Koh Kong 5		Kandal 5		Phnom Penh
Normalization: 1NF -Example   47 DNAME DNUMBER MANAGER DLOCATIONS Research				1			Dara			Phnom Penh Research				1	 		Dara 		  Kandal Research				1			 Dara 		  Prey  Veng Administration			2			 Kosal 		 Phnom Penh Headquarters			3			 Odam 		 Phnom Penh
ស្វែងយល់  Functional Dependency (FD) នៅក្នុង  Database Design  ពាក្យថា   Dependency ( ភាពអាស្រ័យ   ឬការពឹងផ្អែក )   សំដៅលើការតភ្ជាប ់  ឬទំនាក់ទំនងតក្កវិជ្ជារវាង  Column (Attributes)  ផ្សេងៗគ្នានៅក្នុង  Table  តែមួយ ។  វាបង្ហាញថា   តម្លៃនៃ  Column  មួយ   ត្រូវបានកំណត់ដោយតម្លៃនៃ  Column  មួយទៀតយ៉ាងដូចម្តេច ។ ខាងក្រោមនេះជាប្រភេទ  Dependency  សំខាន ់ៗ ដែលលោកអ្នកត្រូវជួបប្រទះក្នុងការឌីហ្សាញ  Database៖ Full Dependency Attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   key  ។ Transitive Dependency ( ភាពអាស្រ័យបន្តបន្ទាប ់) កើតឡើងនៅពេលដែល  Column  មិនមែនជា  Key  មួយ  (ក)  ទៅពឹងផ្អែកលើ  Column  មិនមែនជា  Key  មួយទៀត  (ខ)  ហើយ  Column (ខ)  នោះ   បែរជាទៅពឹងផ្អែកលើ  Primary  ​ key ។ Partial Dependency ( ភាពអាស្រ័យផ្នែកខ្លះ ) គឺជា  attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   attribute  ណាមួយ  នៃ  composite key  ប៉ុណ្ណោះ  ( មិនមែនពឹងលើ  key  ទាំងមូល )។
ស្វែងយល់  Functional Dependency (FD) ឧទាហរណ ៍ : Table  មាន  composite key = (StudentID,  SubjectID ) (StudentID,  SubjectID )  → Score   	✓  ត្រឹមត្រូវ  ( ពឹងលើ  key  ទាំងមូល ) Full Dependency:  Attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   key  ទាំងមូល   ( មិនមែនផ្នែកណាមួយឡើយ ) ។ student_id  →  student_name           	✗  Partial  Dependency ( ពឹងលើផ ្ អែកគូឡោនណា មួយ នៃ  Composite Primary key  ប៉ុណ្ណោះ ) Primary key Transitive  Dependency Full Dependency Full Dependency Partial Dependency
Second normal form (2NF) Already in 1NF 2NF only applies to tables with composite primary keys. And not allow Partial Dependency ​  attribute(Columns).    ***  Partial Dependency ( ភាពពឹងផ្អែកមិនពេញលេញ )      Partial Dependency:  គឺជា  attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   ផ្នែកមួយ   នៃ  composite key  ប៉ុណ្ណោះ  ( មិនមែនពឹងលើ  key  ទាំងមូល )។ Keep  Full Dependent attribute  Full Functional Dependency : Attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   key  ទាំងមូល  ( មិនមែន 	 ផ្នែកណាមួយឡើយ )។ Convert to A* B* D B* C (A,B)  ជា  Composite primary key  Attribute  D  is full dependent on the key. Attribute  C  is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* C D
Incorrect table design Student Information Study Information Table:  StudentScore
Convert to 1NF Student Information Study Information នេះជា  Repeating Group  ដែលធ្វើអោយអ្នកបញ្ចូលពត៍មានសិស្សដដែលៗ នៅពេលមានសិស្សណាសិក្សមុខវិជ្ចាថ្មីណាមួយទៀត   ដូច្នេះ  1NF  ត្រូវបំបែកតារាងដូចខាងក្រោម
  53 ចូរបង្កើត  Form  ដែលយកប្រភពចេញមកពី table: 1NF_Students  រួចបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចខាងក្រោម
1 1 2 2 1
A* B* C D A* B* D B* C Convert To
Convert to 2NF A* B* C D A* B* D B* C Convert To
  58 1 2 3 4 សូមបង្កើត  Table  នឹងភ្ជាប់  Relationship  ដូចខាងក្រោម
5 សូមបង្កើត  Form  ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទិន្នន៏យទាក់ទិននឹងពត៏មាននិស្សិត   
6 សូមបង្កើត  Form  ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទិន្នន៏យទាក់ទិននឹងពត៏មានមុខវិជ្ជា នឹង ពិន្ទុរបស់និស្សិត 1 2 2 2 1 3 3
  61
1 2 3 3 1 1 1 2
Converting TempStaffAllocation table to 2NF   63 *A *B   C   D   E   F *A *B   F *B   C *A   D   E Convert to
TempStaffAllocation  table is not in 2NF   64 *A *B   C   D   E   F
Converting  TempStaff  Allocation table to 2NF   65
  66 Staffs
Normalization: 2NF-Example   67 EMP_PRO   SSN PNUMBER HOURS ENAME PNAME PLOCATION SSN PNUMBER HOURS 2NF NORMALIZATION   SSN ENAME PNUMBER PNAME PLOCATION EMP_Project EMP Project The normalization process EMP_PROJ into 2NF relations.  Partially Dependent Partially Dependent Fully  Dependent
Normalization: 2NF-Example   68
Third Normal Form (3NF)   69 A* B C Convert to A* B B* C It is in the 1NF and Second Normal form. And, it doesn't have Transitive Dependency. Attribute  C  is transitive dependencies A* B* C D VS 2NF 3NF Attribute  D  is full dependent on the  key . Attribute  C  is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* D B* C Convert to
  70 1 2 3
  71 1NF 2NF 3NF
  72 1NF 2NF 3NF
Convert to ERD
  74
  77 Please Create Query 
StaffBranch table is not in 3NF   78
Converting the  StaffBranch  table to 3NF 
3NF- Example ENAME SSN BDATE ADDRESS DNUMBER DNAME MANAGERID ENAME SSN BDATE ADDRESS DNUMBER   80 EMP_DEPT   3NF NORMALIZATION   DNUMBER DNAME MANAGERID ED1 ED2 transitive dependencies
3NF- Example InvoiceNo Invoice_Date CustomerID CustomerName Address CustomerID CustomerName Address   81 3NF NORMALIZATION   InvoiceNo         Invoice_Date CustomerID
Exercise2   82
Exercise2   83
Exercise2-1NF Solution   84
Exercise2-1NF Solution   85
Exercise2-1NF Solution   86
Exercise2-2NF Solution   87
Exercise2: Solution   88 See Application
Exercise2: Solution   89 See Application
Exercise2: Solution   90 See Application
Exercise2: Solution   91 REPORT LIKE  THIS
Exercise3   92
Exercise3: Practical Learning UNF(  Unnormal  Form): ORDER  [( OrderNo   , Order_dt ,  Cust_name ,  Cust_addr ,  Ship_addr ,  		  Phone1, Phone2,  Cust_disc   (   Prod_code ,  Prod_desc ,   		      Qty , Filled, Price ) ]   93 Sample data Here is Repeating Group
Exercise3: Solution 1NF
Exercise3: Solution INF
Exercise3: Solution 2NF
Exercise3: Solution
Exercise3: Solution 2NF
Third Normal Form (3NF)   99 A* B C Convert to A* B B* C It is in the 1NF and Second Normal form. And, it doesn't have Transitive Dependency. Attribute  C  is transitive dependencies A* B* C D VS 2NF 3NF Attribute  D  is full dependent on the  key . Attribute  C  is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* D B* C Convert to
Exercise3: Solution 2NF 3NF Table 3NF:  មិនត្រូវអោយមាន  Transitive  dependencies  CustAddress ,  ShipAddress , Phone1, Phone2  ជា  Transitive  dependencies  ​
Many-To-Many Relationship 3 1 Customers សូមបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចរូបភាព 2 InvoiceDetail Items ក្នុងតារាង  Invoices  ត្រង់  Column:  CustomerID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup ​  Wizard  យកតារាង  Customers   ដោយរើសយក  CustomerName -  ក្នុងតារាង  InvoiceDetail  ត្រង់ ​ Column:  ItemID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup Wizard  យកតារាង  Items   ដោយរើសយក  ItemName 4 សូមបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចរូបភាព 7 8 5 6 Items Invoice
Customers Invoices InvoiceDetail Items 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 2 CustomerID : Invoices
Customers Invoices InvoiceDetail Items Invoices នេះជា  Junction Table  ដោយបញ្ចាក់អត្ថន័យថា វិក័យប័ត្រមួយអាចមានទំនិញច្រើនមុខនៅក្នុងនោះ ហើយសំរាប់ទំនិញនិមួយៗអាចមាននៅក្នុងច្រើនវិក័យប័ត្រផ្សេងៗពីគ្នាដែរ។ InvoiceDetail
  104 Practical Learning Suppose that you have table Project that does not in Normalization(  unnormalized  table) as figure below  Please Derive to 1NF, 2NF and 3NF Relation, Explain. Mapping from 3NF to ERD
Not in normal Form Here is repeating group
1NF
A B C D E F Full Dependency C, D E is Partial Dependency 2NF_EmpWorkOn table is no partial dependency so this table is in 2NF. 2NF Already in 1NF 2NF only applies to tables with composite primary keys. And  not allow Partial Dependency ​  attribute(Columns). Keep  Full Dependent attribute (non key attribute dependent on the Composite primary key.  A B F B C D E 1NF 2NF មាន  Partial Dependency  គឺធ្វើអោយពិបាកបញ្ចូល ពត៌មានបុគ្គលិកដដែលៗ។
Third Normal Form (3NF) A* B C Convert to A* B B* C It is in the 1NF and Second Normal form. And, it doesn't have Transitive Dependency. Attribute  C  is transitive dependencies A* B* C D VS 2NF 3NF Attribute   D   is full dependent on the  key . Attribute   C   is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* D B* C Convert to 2NF >Already in 1NF >2NF only applies to tables with composite primary keys.  And , it should not have Partial Dependency. >Keep fully dependent on the Composite primary key. 
2NF A B C D E F Full Dependency E is Transitive dependency A B C D F D E 3NF
A B C D E F Full Dependency E is Transitive dependency A B C D F D E
1 5 4 2 3 បញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យ
1 7 ត្រង់  Column:  DepartmentID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup  យក  DepartmentName   ចេញពី​  table: ​   Departments 5 ត្រង់  Column:  ProjectManagerID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup ​ យក   EmployeeName   ចេញពី  Table:  Employees ត្រង់  Column:   EmployeeID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup ​ យក   EmployeeName   ចេញពី  Table:  Employees   6 8 2 3 បញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យ 4
សូមធ្វើការភ្ជាប់  Relationship  តាមរូបភាពខាងក្រោម
1 2 2 1 សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form: Employee   ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យបុក្គលិក​ តាមរូបភាពខាងក្រោម សូមបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចខាងក្រោម
សូមបង្កើត  Report:  EmployeeList    ដូចរូបខាងក្រោម 1 2 សូមបង្កើត  Button:  Preview List  ដូចរូបនេះ   ដើម្បីបើក  Report  ខាងលើ ( EmployeeList )
សូមបង្កើត  Report:  Employee Profile   ដូចខាងក្រោម 3 4 សូមបង្កើត  Button:  Preview   ដូចរូបខាងក្រោម ដើម្បីបើក  Report  ខាងលើ  (  EmployeeProfile   )
1 1 2 3 3 4 2 2 4 សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form:  Projects_And_ProjectWorkOn    ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យគំរោងនិងយបុក្គលិកដែលចូលរូមធ្វើគំរោង( Project) ដោយមានម៉ោងផ្សេងៗពីគ្នា   ​  សូមពិនិត្យតាមរូបភាពខាងក្រោម
សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form:  Projects_And_ProjectWorkOn    ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យគំរោងនិងយបុក្គលិកដែលចូលរូមធ្វើគំរោង( Project) ដោយមានម៉ោងផ្សេងៗពីគ្នា   ​ សូមពិនិត្យតាមរូបភាពមួយនេះ 1 3 4 2 2 2 4 3 1
សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form:  Projects_And_ProjectWorkOn    ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យគំរោងនិងយបុក្គលិកដែលចូលរូមធ្វើគំរោង( Project) ដោយមានម៉ោងផ្សេងៗពីគ្នា   ​ សូមពិនិត្យតាមរូបភាពមួយនេះ
សូមបង្កើត  Report  ដូចខាងក្រោម
សូមបង្កើត  Report  ដូចខាងលើ
  124

--- FILE: Chapter02_Data Modeling.pptx ---
Chapter 2-  71 Relationship Types(1) Degree of a Relationship Number of participating entities in  relationship. Relationship of degree: One if Unary/  Recursive  two is binary; three is ternary; four is N-nary.
Chapter 2-  43 Initial Design of Entity Types for the  COMPANY  Database Schema Based on the requirements, we can identify four initial entity types in the COMPANY database: DEPARTMENT PROJECT EMPLOYEE DEPENDENT Their initial design is shown on the following slide The initial attributes shown are derived from the requirements description
Chapter 2-  42 Entity Set Each entity type will have a collection of entities stored in the database Called the  entity set Previous slide shows three CAR entity instances in the entity set for CAR Same name (CAR) used to refer to both the entity type and the entity set Entity set is the current  state  of the entities of that type that are stored in the database
Chapter 2-  41 Entity Type CAR with two keys and a corresponding Entity Set
Chapter 2-  40 Displaying an Entity type In ER diagrams, an entity type is displayed in a rectangular box Attributes are displayed in ovals Each attribute is connected to its entity type Components of a composite attribute are connected to the oval representing the composite attribute Each key attribute is underlined Multivalued attributes displayed in double ovals See CAR example on next slide
Chapter 2-  39 Entity Types and Key Attributes (2) A key attribute may be composite.  VehicleTagNumber is a key of the CAR entity type with components (Number, State). An entity type may have more than one key.  The CAR entity type may have two keys: VehicleIdentificationNumber (popularly called VIN) VehicleTagNumber (Number, State), aka license plate number. Each key is  underlined
Chapter 2-  44 Initial Design of Entity Types :  EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, PROJECT, DEPENDENT
Chapter 2-  45 Refining the initial design by introducing  relationships The initial design is typically not complete Some aspects in the requirements will be represented as  relationships ER model has three main concepts: Entities (and their entity types and entity sets) Attributes (simple, composite, multivalued) Relationships (and their relationship types and relationship sets) We introduce relationship concepts next
Chapter 2-  46 ER DIAGRAM – Relationship Types are: WORKS_FOR, MANAGES, WORKS_ON, CONTROLS, SUPERVISION, DEPENDENTS_OF
Chapter 2-  51 Relationship Type Constraints… One to one relationship: Given two entity sets A and B, there is a one-to-one relationship between A and B if each entity in the set A is associated with at most one entity in the set B and vice versa each entity in the set B is associated with at most one entity in the set A.  Figure :  One-to-one relationship example Example : An employee if is a manager then can manage one department and a department can have only one manager.  Figure :  One-to-one relationship notation Employee Department Emp loyee Manage Department 1 1
Chapter 2-  50 Relationship Type Constraints… Mapping Cardinality  Mapping Cardinality describes the maximum number of entities that a given entity can be associated with via a relationship. In this section, we consider only the cardinality constraint for the binary relationship. The possible cardinality for binary relationship types are : One - to- one (1-1) , One – to – many (1 – N) and Many – to – many (M-N). 
Chapter 2-  49 Relationship Type Constraints  The constraints of relationship types limit the possible combination of entities that participate in the relationship set. Two main types of constraints is  Mapping Cardinality, and Participation 
Chapter 2-  48 Refining the COMPANY database schema by introducing relationships By examining the requirements, six relationship types are identified All are  binary  relationships( degree 2) Listed below with their participating entity types: WORKS_FOR (between EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT) MANAGES (also between EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT) CONTROLS (between DEPARTMENT, PROJECT) WORKS_ON (between EMPLOYEE, PROJECT) SUPERVISION (between EMPLOYEE (as subordinate), EMPLOYEE (as supervisor)) DEPENDENTS_OF (between EMPLOYEE, DEPENDENT)
Chapter 2-  47 Relationships and Relationship Types (1) A  relationship  relates two or more distinct entities with a specific meaning. For example, EMPLOYEE John Smith  works on  the ProductX PROJECT, or EMPLOYEE Franklin Wong  manages  the Research DEPARTMENT. Relationships of the same type are grouped or typed into a  relationship type . For example, the WORKS_ON relationship type in which EMPLOYEEs and PROJECTs participate, or the MANAGES relationship type in which EMPLOYEEs and DEPARTMENTs participate. The degree of a relationship type is the number of participating entity types.  Both MANAGES and WORKS_ON are  binary  relationships.
Chapter 2-  38 Entity Types and Key Attributes (1) An attribute of an entity type for which each entity must have a unique value is called a key attribute of the entity type.  For example, SSN of EMPLOYEE.
Chapter 2-  37 Entity Types and Key Attributes (1) Entities with the same basic attributes are grouped or typed into an entity type.  For example, the entity type EMPLOYEE and COMPANY.
Chapter 2-  36 In some cases two (or more) attribute values are related. For example, the  Age  and  BirthDate  attribute of person. The Age can be determined from the  BirthDate . ER  Model Concepts  -   Stored and Derived Attribute Age  =Current date-  BirthDate Derived Attribute Stored Attribute Professor Age Derived BirthDate Name Age  =Current date-  BirthDate
Chapter 2-  27 Example COMPANY Database We need to create a database schema design based on the following (simplified)  requirements  of the COMPANY Database: The company is organized into DEPARTMENTs. Each department has a unique name, number and an employee who  manages  the department. We keep track of the start date of the department manager. A department may have several locations. Each department  controls  a number of PROJECTs. Each project has a unique name, unique number and is located at a single location.
26 Mapping it to a relational schema with primary and foreign keys   specified.
25 Mapping it to a relational schema with primary and foreign keys   specified.
24
23
Chapter 2-  28 Example COMPANY Database (Contd.) We store each EMPLOYEE’s social security number, address, salary, sex, and birthdate.  Each employee  works for  one department but may  work on  several projects. We keep track of the number of hours per week that an employee currently works on each project. We also keep track of the  direct supervisor  of each employee. Each employee may  have  a number of DEPENDENTs. For each dependent, we keep track of their name, sex, birthdate, and relationship to the employee.
Chapter 2-  29 ER Model a way to model the real world, as things, and how the things are associated together. In this figure it present the concepts of entities and their attributes.
Chapter 2-  30 ER symbol Notation 
Chapter 2-  35 ER  Model Concepts  -  Multiple-Valued  Attributes Multi-value attributes may contain more than one values. For example, a person can have more than one phone number,  email_address , etc. Name Sex Age House# Street# Sankat Khan City Phone Dara M 35 42 150 Ou Rusey 7 makara PP 012,016,011 Vichet M 28 124 51 Phsar chas Daun Penh PP 011,012 Samphors F 27 145 44 Ou Rusey 7 makara PP 012,016 Multiple-Value Attribute Relational Schema Professor Address House# Sankat Khan Street# City Multiple-valued Attribute Phone Name Age Sex
Chapter 2-  34 The Attribute may by composed  of several component for  example address( House  Number, Street Number, Khan,  Province/City). ER  Model Concepts  -  Composite  Attribute Component Attribute House# Professor Name First Name Last Name Address Sankat Khan Street# Salary Component Attribute City Sex First Name Last Name Sex House# Street# Sankat Khan City Salary Samphors Pich F 42 150 Ou Rusey 7 makara Phnom Penh 500 Vichet Lim M 124 51 Phsar chas Daun Penh Phnom Penh 350 Dara Keo M 145 44 Ou Rusey 7 makara Phnom Penh 500 Relational Schema
Chapter 2-  33 ER  Model Concepts -  Simple  Attribute Simple or atomic attribute  is attribute that are not divisible are called simple or atomic attributes.   For example:   Sex,  StartDate , Salary attribute. Relational Schema Professor Start Date Simple Sex Salary Address Name Name Sex Address Start Date Salary Samphors F #22, Street 131, Khan 7 Makara, PP 01-05-06 500 Vichet F #25, Street 35, Khan 7 Makara, PP 02-04-07 350 Data M #312 , Street 135, Khan  chamkamon , PP 05-06-07 400 Table: Professor
Chapter 2-  32 Each entity has a set of associated properties that describes the entity. These properties are known as attributes. Example: people have  names  and  addresses   Domain   – the set of permitted values for each attribute Type of Attributes : Simple or atomic  Composite Single-valued Multi-valued Stored Derived ER Model Concepts - Attributes
Chapter 2-  31 ER Model Concepts (  Cont ,…) Entities and Attributes Entities are specific objects or things in the mini-world that are represented in the database. For example the EMPLOYEE Dara, the Research DEPARTMENT. Employees SSN Name Region SSN Name Region 123-22-3666 231-31-5368 131-24-3650 Dara Smay Vichet 48 22 35 ER( Chen-Style notation) Relational Schema Table: Employees
Chapter 2-  52 Relationship Type Constraints… Example : An employee if is a manager then can manage one department and a department can have only one manager.  Employee Department Employee Department
Chapter 2-  53 Relationship Type Constraints… One to many relationship:  one entity in A may be associated with zero/more number of entities in B.  However, one entity in B can be associated with at most one entity from A. Figure :  One-to-many relationship example មានន័យថាតំលៃមួយជួរ( Record)  ក្នុងតារាងទិន្នន័យដើមមួយ​អាចមានច្រើន Record  នៅក្នុងតារាងទិន្នន័យកូនផ្សេងទៀតដែលទាក់ទងគ្ នា។   ឧទាហ រណ៏ ខាងក្រោម បានបង្ហាញ តារាងទិន្នន័យ ផ្នែក( Department)  មូយ   អាច មានបុគ្គលិកច្រើននាក់ធ្វើការក្នុងនោះ។ Figure :  Many-to-one relationship notation Employee: B Department : A Emp loyee Work For Department M 1
Chapter 2-  54 Relationship Type Constraints… Many to many relationship :  There is a many to many relationship sets associates two entities sets A and B if each entity in A is associated with several entities in B however, each entity in B is associated with several entities in A.  Example : An employee can join in several projects and a project can have several employees. Figure :  Many-to-many relationship notation
Chapter 2-  80 Discussion on Relationship Types In the refined design, some attributes from the initial entity types are refined into relationships: Manager of DEPARTMENT -> MANAGES Works_on of EMPLOYEE -> WORKS_ON Department of EMPLOYEE -> WORKS_FOR etc In general, more than one relationship type can exist between the same participating entity types  MANAGES and WORKS_FOR are distinct relationship types between EMPLOYEE and DEPARTMENT Different meanings and different relationship instances.
Chapter 2-  81 Recursive Relationship Type An relationship type whose with the same participating entity type in  distinct roles Example: the SUPERVISION relationship EMPLOYEE participates twice in two distinct roles: supervisor (or boss) role supervisee (or subordinate) role Each relationship instance relates two distinct EMPLOYEE entities: One employee in  supervisor  role One employee in  supervisee  role
Chapter 2-  82 Attributes of Relationship types A relationship type can have attributes: For example, HoursPerWeek of WORKS_ON Its value for each relationship instance describes the number of hours per week that an EMPLOYEE works on a PROJECT. A value of HoursPerWeek depends on a particular (employee, project) combination Most relationship attributes are used with M:N relationships In 1:N relationships, they can be transferred to the entity type on the N-side of the relationship
Chapter 2-  83 Example Attribute of a Relationship Type:  Hours of WORKS_ON
Chapter 2-  84 Summary of notation for ER diagrams
Chapter 2-  79 ER DIAGRAM – Relationship Types are: WORKS_FOR, MANAGES, WORKS_ON, CONTROLS, SUPERVISION, DEPENDENTS_OF
Chapter 2-  78 Attributes of Relationship Types  The relationship types can have attributes like entity types. For 1-1 and 1-N relationship types, attributes of the relationship can be migrated to one of the participating entity types. However, for M-N relationship types, attributes must be specified as the relationship attribute.  Example: The StartDate attribute records the date on which an employee joins in a project Figure :  Attribute in relationship example
Chapter 2-  77 Degree of Relationship Type…
Chapter 2-  72 Degree of Relationship Type… One if Unary/  Recursive  sample EMPLOYEE Supervises Emp_Num Emp_Name Emp_Address Supervisor  Supervisee 1 n Figure :  Supervise Relationship Figure :  Recursive Relationship Notation 
Chapter 2-  73 Recursive Relationship Type is:  SUPERVISION (participation role names are shown)
Chapter 2-  74 Degree of Relationship Type… Binary relationship type: This relationship type has two entity types link together. This is the most common relationship.  For example the “Joins in” relationship between EMPLOYEE and PROJECT Figure :  "Joins in" Relationship Figure :  "Joins in" relationship notation
Chapter 2-  75 Degree of Relationship Type… Ternary relationship type: If there are three entity types link together, the relationship is called ternary relationship.  For example: The Supply relationship associates a SUPPLIER, a PART and a PROJECT.  Figure :  Ternary relationship example Figure :  Ternary relationship notation
Chapter 2-  76 Degree of Relationship Type…
Chapter 2-  68 Weak Entity Type(7) Examples: Private Sub  BranchNo_GotFocus () BranchNo.RowSource  = "SELECT  BRANCHNO  FROM BANKS_BRANCH WHERE BCODE=" &  BCode  & "" End Sub
Chapter 2-  67 Weak Entity Type(6)
Chapter 2-  59 Weak Entities (2) A  weak entity   can be identified uniquely only by considering the primary key of another ( owner ) entity. Owner entity set and weak entity set must participate in a one-to-many relationship set (one owner, many weak entities). Weak entity set must have total participation in this  identifying  relationship set.   Address name age pname Employees ssn cost 1 N Policy Dependents
Chapter 2-  58 Weak Entity Type  Weak entity types are those whose existence depends on the existence of other entity type. Entities belongs to weak entity type are identified by being related to specific entities from another entity type which is called strong entity types.  The weak entity type does not have key attributes of their own. The keys of this type totally derived from strong entity types.  In ER diagram, weak entity and strong/weak relationship are denoted by double box/diamond 
Chapter 2-  57 Relationship Type Constraints… Example2 : Every  Dnumber    value in Departments table must appear in a row of the Manages (with a non-null  EID  value!) DEPARTMENT budget N 1 EMPLOYEE Salary Address EID Birthdate EName DNumber DName MANAGES StartDate Partial Total DNumber DName Budget EID(Manager) Start_Date 1000 Financial $5000 03 01-05-06 1001 IT $8000 01 05-05-07 1002 HR $6000 05-05-07 EID EName BirthDate Address Salary 01 Vichet 01-01-78 #84, Stree:.. 250 02 Dara 01-05-80 #45, Street:.. 200 03 Rithy 06-04-72 #22,  Stree : 350 Employee This attribute can not stored the null value Department
Chapter 2-  56 Relationship Type Constraints… Participation   The participation constraints specify whether the existence of an entity depends on its being related to another entity via the relationship type.  Participation in relationship set R by entity set A may be Total :  It means every entity a in A participates in at least 1 relationship in R  Partial:  It means only some a in A participate in relationships in R  Example Every project have at least 1 employee joined in it.  Not every employee in the company join in a project Figure :  Participation in relationship notation
study Chapter 2-  55 Relationship Type Constraints… Many-to-many:  Example: relationship STUDY between STUDENT and COURSE is many-to-many Subjects M N Students Score StudentID StudentName Department SubjectID SubjectName HourPerWeek Sex Study Students Subjects
Weak Entity Type(3) Examples: branches  of a  bank, E-R  diagrams follow
Chapter 2-  61 Weak Entity Type(3) Examples: branches  of a  bank, E-R  diagrams follow
Chapter 2-  62 Weak Entity Type(4) Examples:
Chapter 2-  66 Weak Entity Type(5) Examples:
Chapter 2-  65 Weak Entity Type(5)
Chapter 2-  64 Weak Entity Type(5) Examples: Convert to relational
Chapter 2-  63 Student Subject Study StudentID SubjectID SutdentName Score M N Subject Comparison many-to-many relationship with Weak entity Vs
22 Chapter 2 Practice Learning Exercise 1 You are hired to implement an object-relational database schema of  movie distribution center .  The database schema consist of requriement  and  need to record information as below: Theaters that specifies the theaterNo (integer) is unique, theaterName(text), Address(text) of all theaters, and phone number . A theater may have several phone number. Movie that specifies the MovieNo (Integer) is unique, MovieTit le  (Text), Set of stars(text), Director(Text), Budget (Number), and Date  Release (Date) of each movie. Each  movies  is  now showing is serveral theaters. Each theater may show different  movies .  The Showing relationship specified, Startdate (Date), and EndDate (date). Manager that specifies the managerID (number)  is unique , manageName ( Text), Address (Text), Phone (text), and email. Each theater is manage by one manager and a manager can only manage one theater. Producer that specifies the producerNo(number)  is unique , producerName (Text), from company(Text), Address (Text), phone (Text), and Email address. Each movie is mad by one movie producer and one movie producer can make multiple movies. Problem:    Create an  Entity–Relationship (ER) model  of the data requirements for the  movie distribution center  case study using Chen-style ER notation. State any assumptions necessary to support your design. Derive a  relational schema  from your ER model that represents the entities and relationships. Identify primary and foreign keys.
Chapter 2-  21 Database Design (cont’d) Physical Design Specify internal storage structures, indices, access paths and file organizations
Chapter 2-  20 Database Design (cont’d) Logical Design (data model mapping) Map conceptual schema to an implementation data model (e.g., relational database model)
Chapter 2-  8 Phases of database design Physical database design is the process of producing a description of the implementation of the database on secondary storage; it describes the base tables, file organizations, and indexes used to achieve efficient access to the data, and any associated integrity constraints and security restrictions.
Chapter 2-  7 Phases of database design Two main phases: logical and physical database design.  Logical database design is the process of constructing a model of data used in an organization based on a specific data model, but independent of a particular DBMS and other physical considerations.
Chapter 2-  6 What is a design methodology? A structured approach that uses procedures, techniques, tools, and documentation aids to support and facilitate the process of design.
Chapter 2-  5 Introduction to the database design methodology If the database is reasonably complex, a systematic approach is needed to design and build the database to ensure that it satisfies users ’  requirements and achieves stated performance requirements.  This systematic approach is called a  database design methodology .
Difference Between DFD and ERD ERD means the  Entity-relationship Diagram , which reflects the key relationships between different entities in an information system: members, roles, items, products, locations, concepts and more.  . Data flow diagram (DFD) Entity Relationship Diagram(ERD) DFD and ERD are different data models that are mainly used for organizing business data for proper communication between members of a group. Reference:  https://www.edrawsoft.com/erdiagram/differences-dfd-erd.html DFD represents the Data Flow Diagram, which shows the flow of a series of data based on a certain information system model. DFD is generally used for outlining the pattern and framework of a data system without showing processing time options in sequence, for example, the Yes or No choices in typical flowcharts. In reality, DFD can be used for information management or data visualization. Here you can see an example of the DFD, which shows the overall data flow for making a ordering in a restaurant.
Chapter 2-  3 What is Data Modeling? Data modeling is the analysis of data objects that are used in a business. Data modeling focuses on representing the data as the user actually sees it, bridging between the concepts that make up real-world events.
Chapter 2-  2 Chapter Outline Overview of Database Design Process Example Database Application (COMPANY) ER Model Concepts Entities and Attributes Entity Types, Value Sets, and Key Attributes Relationships and Relationship Types Weak Entity Types Roles and Attributes in Relationship Types ER Diagrams - Notation ER Diagram for COMPANY Schema
Lecturer: Mr.  Prum   Chansamedy ,  MSIT Tel: 069 999-733 E-mail: chansamedy@gmail.com Chapter 2 SYSTEMS DESING  Data Modelling Using ERD
Chapter 2-  9 Critical success factors in database design Work interactively with the users as much as possible. Follow a structured methodology throughout the data  modelling  process. Use normalization and transaction validation techniques in the methodology. Use diagrams to represent as much of the data models as possible. Use a database design language (DBDL). Build a data dictionary to supplement the data model diagrams. Be willing to repeat steps.
Chapter 2-  11 Step 1 - Tasks Step 1.1 Identify entities Step 1.2 Identify relationships Step 1.3 Identify and associate attributes with entities or relationships Step 1.4 Determine attribute domains
Chapter 2-  19 Database Design (cont’d) Conceptual Design Using a high level conceptual data model Concise description of the data requirements Entities, relationships and constraints Not concerned with implementation/storage details (High-Level) Confirm that conceptual schema meets the identified functional requirements
Chapter 2-  18 Database Design (cont’d) Example  :  Requirements collection and analysis information requirements sample
Chapter 2-  17 Database Design (cont’d) Requirements collection and analysis Document data requirements Functional requirements User-defined operations (or transactions – including retrievals and updates) business object: some representation must be made to show the relationship between any two objects. User Group External Data Model
Chapter 2-  16 Overview of Database Design Process
Chapter 2-  10 Step 1 Create and check ER model Objective is to build an ER model of the data requirements of an organization (or part of an organization) to be supported by the database.
Chapter 2-  14 Step 1.1 Identify entities One method is to examine the users ’  requirements specification for nouns or noun phrases  Also look for major objects such as people, places, or concepts of interest, excluding those nouns that are merely qualities of other objects. Document entities 
Chapter 2-  12 Step 1 - Tasks Step 1.5 Determine candidate, primary, and alternate key attributes Step 1.6 Specialize/Generalize entities (optional step)  Step 1.7 Check model for redundancy
Chapter 2-  15 StayHome entities Branch			Staff Video				VideoForRent Member			RentalAgreement Actor				Director
Chapter 2-  13 Step 1 - Tasks Step 1.8 Check model supports user transactions Step 1.9 Check model with users

--- FILE: Chapter02_Practical_Learning_Binary_Ternerry.pptx ---
8 Ternary relationships A ternary relationship is NOT the same as three binary relationships between the same three entity types. Three Binary Relationship A Ternary Relationship 1 N M M N M N M N
5 Binary relationships A binary relationship is a relationship between instances of two entity types and is the most common type of relationship encountered in practice. The ER diagram for this relationship type is : 
4 Table for the  1:M  “EMPLOYEE Manages EMPLOYEE” Recursive Relationship Supervision  Emp Emp_Code Emp_Name address N 1 Supervisor Supervisee
3 Table for the  1:1  Recursive Relationship “EMPLOYEE Married to EMPLOYEE”
2 Recursive    relationships A  Recursive  relationship is a relationship between instances of one entity type (also called a  Unary  relationship) Table for the  1:1  Recursive Relationship “EMPLOYEE Married to EMPLOYEE” SS# name address 1 1 Emp Married to
1 Practical Learning: Relationship Degree Relationships can be classified by the number of entity types involved. This is referred to as the  degree  of a relationship. To this point we have concerned ourselves with relationships between two entity types. This is, by far, the most common type of relationships. The most common degrees of relationships are as follows: Recursive /U-nary Relationship This is a relationship involving only one entity type. Binary Relationship This is a relationship between two entity types.  Ternary Relationship This is a relationship between three entity types.  N-nary Relationship  This is a relationship more than three entity types.
6 Implementation off M:N “Employee Joins_in Project” Binary Relationship  Tables for a  Binary relationships
7 Ternary relationships A ternary relationship is a  simultaneous  relationship between instances of three entity types.  For example: The Supply relationship associates a SUPPLIER, a PART and a PROJECT.  The ER diagram for this relationship type is
13 Ternary Relationships 1:M:N Ternary Relationship in ER Model Three Binary Relationship In ER Diagram
10 Ternary relationships A Ternary Relationship M N M N M N M
9 Ternary relationships Three Binary Relationship M N M N M N
12 Chapter 7 Tutorial 5 Map the following relational schema into an ER schema. This is part of a process known as reverse engineering, where a conceptual schema is created for an existing implemented database. Ternary relationships
11 Ternary relationships BOOK PUBLISHER Book- Publish BookID Title PName BORROWER BranchName N 1 BOOK- COPIES M N Address BranchID BAddress PAddress PPhone DateOut BName AuthorName DueDate CardNo BPhone BOOK- LOANS LIBRARY-BRANCH NoOfCopies

--- FILE: Chapter03_Maping.pptx ---
  2 Available at the Computer  Library of Norton University: Fundamental of  	 		Database  			systems,  		Elmasri & Navatthe 	 Other Texts
  3 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm
  4 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm Mapping of Regular Entity Types. For each regular (strong) entity type E in the ER schema, create a relation R that includes all the simple attributes of E. Choose one of the key attributes of E as the primary key for R. If the chosen key of E is composite, the set of simple attributes that form it will together form the primary key of R. Example: We create the relations EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, and PROJECT in the relational schema corresponding to the regular entities in the ER diagram. SSN, DNUMBER, and PNUMBER are the primary keys for the relations EMPLOYEE, DEPARTMENT, and PROJECT as shown.
  5 FIGURE 7.1 The ER conceptual schema diagram for the COMPANY database.
  6 Result of mapping the COMPANY ER schema into a relational schema.
  7 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.) Mapping of Weak Entity Types For each weak entity type W in the ER schema with owner entity type E, create a relation R & include all simple attributes (or simple components of composite attributes) of W as attributes of R. Also, include as foreign key attributes of R the primary key attribute(s) of the relation(s) that correspond to the owner entity type(s). The primary key of R is the  combination of  the primary key(s) of the owner(s) and the partial key of the weak entity type W, if any. Example:  Create the relation DEPENDENT in this step to correspond to the weak entity type DEPENDENT. Include the primary key SSN of the EMPLOYEE relation as a foreign key attribute of DEPENDENT (renamed to ESSN).  The primary key of the DEPENDENT relation is the combination {ESSN, DEPENDENT_NAME} because DEPENDENT_NAME is the partial key of DEPENDENT. 
  8 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.) Mapping of Binary 1:1 Relation Types For each binary 1:1 relationship type R in the ER schema, identify the relations S and T that correspond to the entity types participating in R. There are three possible approaches: Foreign Key approach:  Choose one of the relations-say S-and include a foreign key in S the primary key of T. It is better to choose an entity type with total participation in R in the role of S.  Example: 1:1 relation MANAGES is mapped by choosing the participating entity type DEPARTMENT to serve in the role of S, because its participation in the MANAGES relationship type is total. Merged relation option:  An alternate mapping of a 1:1 relationship type is possible by merging the two entity types and the relationship into a single relation. This may be appropriate when both participations are total. Cross-reference   or relationship relation option:  The third alternative is to set up a third relation R for the purpose of cross-referencing the primary keys of the two relations S and T representing the entity types.
  11 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.) Mapping of Multivalued attributes. For each multivalued attribute A, create a new relation R.  This relation R will include an attribute corresponding to A, plus the primary key attribute K-as a foreign key in R-of the relation that represents the entity type of relationship type that has A as an attribute.  The primary key of R is the combination of A and K. If the multivalued attribute is composite, we include its simple components. Example:  The relation DEPT_LOCATIONS is created.  The attribute DLOCATION represents the multivalued attribute LOCATIONS of DEPARTMENT, while DNUMBER-as foreign key-represents the primary key of the DEPARTMENT relation. The primary key of R is the combination of {DNUMBER, DLOCATION}.
  10 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.) Mapping of Binary M:N Relationship Types. For each regular binary M:N relationship type R,  create a new relation  S to represent R.  Include as foreign key attributes in S the primary keys of the relations that represent the participating entity types;  their combination will form the primary key  of S.  Also include any simple attributes of the M:N relationship type (or simple components of composite attributes) as attributes of S. Example: The M:N relationship type WORKS_ON from the ER  diagram is mapped by creating a relation WORKS_ON in the relational database schema. The primary keys of the PROJECT and EMPLOYEE relations are included as foreign keys in WORKS_ON and renamed PNO and ESSN, respectively.  Attribute HOURS in WORKS_ON represents the HOURS attribute of the relation type. The primary key of the WORKS_ON relation is the combination of the foreign key attributes {ESSN, PNO}.
  9 ER-to-Relational Mapping Algorithm (contd.) Mapping of Binary 1:N Relationship Types. For each regular binary 1:N relationship type R, identify the relation S that represent the participating entity type at the N-side of the relationship type.  Include as foreign key in S the primary key of the relation T that represents the other entity type participating in R.  Include any simple attributes of the 1:N relation type as attributes of S.  Example: 1:N relationship types WORKS_FOR, CONTROLS, and SUPERVISION in the figure. For WORKS_FOR we include the primary key DNUMBER of the DEPARTMENT relation as foreign key in the EMPLOYEE relation and call it DNO. 
Lecturer:   Mr. Prum Chan Samedy   Tel: 012 456-896 Bachelor  of Science in Information Technology Chapter 3: Mapping ER to Relational schema

--- FILE: Chapter04_Normaliation.pptx ---
Apri  1 th , 2026 Advance Database System
Who am I? PRUM  Chansamedy E-mail: chansamedy@gmail.com Mobile Phone:  069-999-733    	          ​​​		 012 456-896 https://www.youtube.com/@samedyprum4956  More than 29 years of professional working experience as database programming  trainer  Software Development IT Services
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves  both create structure for storage of information and providing  mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as  following:   Employees list Student list Hotel Management Billing system Inventory System Payroll system, etc.
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both create structure for storage of information and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as following: 
Objectives  After finished this course students able to design to manage large bodies of information. Management of data involves both create structure for storage of information and providing mechanisms for the manipulation of information  such as using SQL language.
Software Taught Visible Analyst (CASE Tool) DBMS with Oracle, and MS-Access use for graphic user interface(GUI)
Lecturer: Mr.  Prum  Chan  Samedy ,  MScIT Tel: 069 999-733 E-mail: chansamedy@gmail.com Bachelor  of Science in Information Technology Chapter 1: Database Design
Understanding DBMS Key What are Keys? A DBMS key is an attribute or set of an attribute which helps you to identify a row(tuple) in a relation(table). They allow you to find the relation between two tables. Keys help you uniquely identify a row in a table by a combination of one or more columns in that table Example: Various Keys in Database Management System DBMS has following seven types of Keys each have their different functionality: Candidate Key Primary Key Foreign Key In the above-given example, employee ID is a primary key because it uniquely identifies an employee record. In this table, no other employee can have the same employee ID.
Understanding DBMS Key A  primary key  is a special relational database table column (or combination of columns) designated to uniquely identify all table records. A primary key is used as a unique identifier to quickly parse data within the database and find the relation between different tables. A relational database cannot have more than one primary key. Candidate Keys :  Any field that could serve as a primary key is called a candidate key.  The Primary key should be selected from the candidate keys. Every table must have at least a single candidate key. A table can have multiple candidate keys but only a single primary key.
Understanding DBMS Key A  primary key  is a special relational database table column (or combination of columns) designated to uniquely identify all table records. A primary key is used as a unique identifier to quickly parse data within the database and find the relation between different tables. A relational database cannot have more than one primary key. Candidate Keys :  Any field that could serve as a primary key is called a candidate key.  The Primary key should be selected from the candidate keys. Every table must have at least a single candidate key. A table can have multiple candidate keys but only a single primary key.
Understanding DBMS Key:  Primary key and Foreign key A primary key’s main features are: It must contain a unique value for each row of data. It cannot contain null values. Every row must have a primary key value. Foreign Keys Foreign Keys:  A foreign key is a field in one table  that must match a primary key value in another  table  in order  to establish the relationship between  the two tables.  Primary Keys
  12 Lab:  Primary key and Foreign key
  13 Lab:  Primary key and Foreign key Field Properties: Default Value: =Date()
  14 Lab:  Primary key and Foreign key StudentID   នៅក្នុង  Table:  TblPayment   គេអោយឈ្មោះថា  Foreign Key  មានន័យថាបញ្ចូលតម្លៃ  Foreign key  គឺយើងអាចស្គាល់តម្លៃរប់ស់  Primary key ( StudentID )  ក្នុង តារាងដើម(​ Primary table) ។​ មានន័យថាបញ្ចូល លេខកូដនិស្សិត លេខ១ អ្នកអាចឃើញនូវ ឈ្មោះ ភេទ ផ្នែក  ….
Primary key-Single Column Primary  key
Primary key- Multies  Column លក្ខខ័ណ្ឌះ   មុខវិជ្ជាមួយអាចផ្តល់អោយសិស្សច្រើននាក់​សិក្សាបាន។ ចំពោះនិស្សិត ម្នាក់ៗអាចសិក្សាបានច្រើនមុខវិជ្ចា តែមិនអាចសិក្សាមុខវិជ្ចាដដែលៗបានទេ។ Message  Box  Error  ដោយសារតែមានការបញ្ជូល​និស្សិត ដែល​​មានលេខសំគាល់ លេខ១ សិក្សាមុខវិជ្ចា  DB  ដដែលៗ។ 
Primary key- Multies  Column
Primary key: Lab01 =Date( )
Primary key: Lab01 [ Qty ]*[Price] ភ្ជាប់ទំនាកទំនង Define  Relationship   =Date()
  21
  22
  23
  24 Practical learning with setting primary key =Date()
ត្រង់  Column:  CustomerID_SoldTo សូម  Lookup  តំលៃ   CustomerName ពី Table:  Customer 1 2 3 =Date() Practical learning with setting primary key
ត្រង់  Column:  CustomerID_SoldTo សូម  Lookup  តំលៃ   CustomerName ពី Table:  Customer 1 2 3 =Date() =[ Qty ]*[Price]
Normalization When designing database you are faced with a series of choices. How many table will there be and will they represent? Which columns will go in which tables? What the relationships between the tables be? The answer  each to these question lies in something called Normalization.   A technique for producing a set of tables with desirable properties that support the requirements of a user or company.   31
Data redundancy and update anomalies Major aim of relational database design is to group columns into tables to minimize data redundancy and reduce file storage space required by base tables. Problems associated with data redundancy are illustrated by comparing the Staff and Branch tables with the  StaffBranch  table.   32 Table:  StaffBranch StaffBranch  table has redundant data,  the details of a branch are repeated for every member of staff.
Data redundancy and update anomalies   33 Staff Branch Table:  StaffBranch In contrast, the branch information appears only once for each branch in the Branch table and only the branch number ( branchNo ) is repeated in the Staff table, to represent where each member of staff is located.
Data redundancy: Solution
Data redundancy: Solution
Report Output Data redundancy: Solution and result
The Normal Forms A series of logical steps to take to normalize data tables First Normal Form Second Third There’s more, but beyond scope of this
First Normal Form (1NF) First Normal Form (1NF) says that all column values not  contains multi value and not allow repeating group. Note:  this state a relation all underlying domains compulsorily contain atomic values only   41
Converting Branch table to 1NF
Converting Branch table to 1NF   43
Example of 1NF ( NOT 1NF)   44 Research				5		333445555       { Koh  Kong,  Kandal , Phnom Penh} Administration			4		987654321       { Kandal } Headquarters			1		888665555       { Phnom Penh } DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS Department DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS Research			5			333445555	 	Phnom Penh Research			5			333445555	 	Kandal Research			5			333445555	 	Koh Kong Administration		4			987654321	 	Kandal Headquarters		1			888665555	 	Phnom Penh (A)  Not in 1NF because relation with multi value attribute.   (B) Not in 1NF because relation with redundancy (Repeating Group).   (A) (B) Department
Normalization: 1NF -Example DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID Research 5 333445555 Administration 4 987654321 Headquarters 1 888665555 DNUMBER DLOCATIONS 1			Phnom Penh 4			Phnom Penh 5			 Koh  Kong 5			 Kandal 5			Phnom Penh DEPT_LOCATIONS  DEPARTMENT  1NF NORMALIZATION   DEPARTMENT relation schemas normalize into NF relations: DEPARTMENT and DEPT_LOCATIONS. DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS Research				5		333445555		Phnom Penh Research				5		333445555		Kandal Research				5		333445555		 Koh Kong Administration			4		987654321	 	Phnom Penh Headquarters			1		888665555		 Phnom Penh
Normalization: 1NF -Example DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID Research 5 333445555 Administration 4 987654321 Headquarters 1 888665555   46 DEPT_LOCATIONS  DEPARTMENT  1NF NORMALIZATION   DEPARTMENT relation schemas normalize into two 1NF relations: DEPARTMENT and DEPT_LOCATIONS. Research				5		333445555       { Koh  Kong,  Kandal , Phnom Penh} Administration			4		987654321       { Kandal } Headquarters			1		888665555       { Phnom Penh } DNAME DNUMBER MANAGERID DLOCATIONS DNUMBER DLOCATIONS 1		Phnom Penh 4		Kandal 5		Koh Kong 5		Kandal 5		Phnom Penh
Normalization: 1NF -Example   47 DNAME DNUMBER MANAGER DLOCATIONS Research				1			Dara			Phnom Penh Research				1	 		Dara 		  Kandal Research				1			 Dara 		  Prey  Veng Administration			2			 Kosal 		 Phnom Penh Headquarters			3			 Odam 		 Phnom Penh
ស្វែងយល់  Functional Dependency (FD) នៅក្នុង  Database Design  ពាក្យថា   Dependency ( ភាពអាស្រ័យ   ឬការពឹងផ្អែក )   សំដៅលើការតភ្ជាប ់  ឬទំនាក់ទំនងតក្កវិជ្ជារវាង  Column (Attributes)  ផ្សេងៗគ្នានៅក្នុង  Table  តែមួយ ។  វាបង្ហាញថា   តម្លៃនៃ  Column  មួយ   ត្រូវបានកំណត់ដោយតម្លៃនៃ  Column  មួយទៀតយ៉ាងដូចម្តេច ។ ខាងក្រោមនេះជាប្រភេទ  Dependency  សំខាន ់ៗ ដែលលោកអ្នកត្រូវជួបប្រទះក្នុងការឌីហ្សាញ  Database៖ Full Dependency Attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   key  ។ Transitive Dependency ( ភាពអាស្រ័យបន្តបន្ទាប ់) កើតឡើងនៅពេលដែល  Column  មិនមែនជា  Key  មួយ  (ក)  ទៅពឹងផ្អែកលើ  Column  មិនមែនជា  Key  មួយទៀត  (ខ)  ហើយ  Column (ខ)  នោះ   បែរជាទៅពឹងផ្អែកលើ  Primary  ​ key ។ Partial Dependency ( ភាពអាស្រ័យផ្នែកខ្លះ ) គឺជា  attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   attribute  ណាមួយ  នៃ  composite key  ប៉ុណ្ណោះ  ( មិនមែនពឹងលើ  key  ទាំងមូល )។
ស្វែងយល់  Functional Dependency (FD) ឧទាហរណ ៍ : Table  មាន  composite key = (StudentID,  SubjectID ) (StudentID,  SubjectID )  → Score   	✓  ត្រឹមត្រូវ  ( ពឹងលើ  key  ទាំងមូល ) Full Dependency:  Attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   key  ទាំងមូល   ( មិនមែនផ្នែកណាមួយឡើយ ) ។ student_id  →  student_name           	✗  Partial  Dependency ( ពឹងលើផ ្ អែកគូឡោនណា មួយ នៃ  Composite Primary key  ប៉ុណ្ណោះ ) Primary key Transitive  Dependency Full Dependency Full Dependency Partial Dependency
Second normal form (2NF) Already in 1NF 2NF only applies to tables with composite primary keys. And not allow Partial Dependency ​  attribute(Columns).    ***  Partial Dependency ( ភាពពឹងផ្អែកមិនពេញលេញ )      Partial Dependency:  គឺជា  attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   ផ្នែកមួយ   នៃ  composite key  ប៉ុណ្ណោះ  ( មិនមែនពឹងលើ  key  ទាំងមូល )។ Keep  Full Dependent attribute  Full Functional Dependency : Attribute  ដែលមិនមែនជា  key  ពឹងផ្អែកលើ   key  ទាំងមូល  ( មិនមែន 	 ផ្នែកណាមួយឡើយ )។ Convert to A* B* D B* C (A,B)  ជា  Composite primary key  Attribute  D  is full dependent on the key. Attribute  C  is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* C D
Incorrect table design Student Information Study Information Table:  StudentScore
Convert to 1NF Student Information Study Information នេះជា  Repeating Group  ដែលធ្វើអោយអ្នកបញ្ចូលពត៍មានសិស្សដដែលៗ នៅពេលមានសិស្សណាសិក្សមុខវិជ្ចាថ្មីណាមួយទៀត   ដូច្នេះ  1NF  ត្រូវបំបែកតារាងដូចខាងក្រោម
  53 ចូរបង្កើត  Form  ដែលយកប្រភពចេញមកពី table: 1NF_Students  រួចបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចខាងក្រោម
1 1 2 2 1
A* B* C D A* B* D B* C Convert To
Convert to 2NF A* B* C D A* B* D B* C Convert To
  58 1 2 3 4 សូមបង្កើត  Table  នឹងភ្ជាប់  Relationship  ដូចខាងក្រោម
5 សូមបង្កើត  Form  ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទិន្នន៏យទាក់ទិននឹងពត៏មាននិស្សិត   
6 សូមបង្កើត  Form  ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទិន្នន៏យទាក់ទិននឹងពត៏មានមុខវិជ្ជា នឹង ពិន្ទុរបស់និស្សិត 1 2 2 2 1 3 3
  61
1 2 3 3 1 1 1 2
Converting TempStaffAllocation table to 2NF   63 *A *B   C   D   E   F *A *B   F *B   C *A   D   E Convert to
TempStaffAllocation  table is not in 2NF   64 *A *B   C   D   E   F
Converting  TempStaff  Allocation table to 2NF   65
  66 Staffs
Normalization: 2NF-Example   67 EMP_PRO   SSN PNUMBER HOURS ENAME PNAME PLOCATION SSN PNUMBER HOURS 2NF NORMALIZATION   SSN ENAME PNUMBER PNAME PLOCATION EMP_Project EMP Project The normalization process EMP_PROJ into 2NF relations.  Partially Dependent Partially Dependent Fully  Dependent
Normalization: 2NF-Example   68
Third Normal Form (3NF)   69 A* B C Convert to A* B B* C It is in the 1NF and Second Normal form. And, it doesn't have Transitive Dependency. Attribute  C  is transitive dependencies A* B* C D VS 2NF 3NF Attribute  D  is full dependent on the  key . Attribute  C  is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* D B* C Convert to
  70 1 2 3
  71 1NF 2NF 3NF
  72 1NF 2NF 3NF
  73
  76 Please Create Query 
StaffBranch table is not in 3NF   77
Converting the  StaffBranch  table to 3NF 
3NF- Example ENAME SSN BDATE ADDRESS DNUMBER DNAME MANAGERID ENAME SSN BDATE ADDRESS DNUMBER   79 EMP_DEPT   3NF NORMALIZATION   DNUMBER DNAME MANAGERID ED1 ED2 transitive dependencies
3NF- Example InvoiceNo Invoice_Date CustomerID CustomerName Address CustomerID CustomerName Address   80 3NF NORMALIZATION   InvoiceNo         Invoice_Date CustomerID
Exercise2   81
Exercise2   82
Exercise2-1NF Solution   83
Exercise2-1NF Solution   84
Exercise2-1NF Solution   85
Exercise2-2NF Solution   86
Exercise2: Solution   87 See Application
Exercise2: Solution   88 See Application
Exercise2: Solution   89 See Application
Exercise2: Solution   90 REPORT LIKE  THIS
Exercise3   91
Exercise3: Practical Learning UNF(  Unnormal  Form): ORDER  [( OrderNo   , Order_dt ,  Cust_name ,  Cust_addr ,  Ship_addr ,  		  Phone1, Phone2,  Cust_disc   (   Prod_code ,  Prod_desc ,   		      Qty , Filled, Price ) ]   92 Sample data Here is Repeating Group
Exercise3: Solution 1NF
Exercise3: Solution INF
Exercise3: Solution 2NF
Exercise3: Solution
Exercise3: Solution 2NF
Third Normal Form (3NF)   98 A* B C Convert to A* B B* C It is in the 1NF and Second Normal form. And, it doesn't have Transitive Dependency. Attribute  C  is transitive dependencies A* B* C D VS 2NF 3NF Attribute  D  is full dependent on the  key . Attribute  C  is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* D B* C Convert to
Exercise3: Solution 2NF 3NF Table 3NF:  មិនត្រូវអោយមាន  Transitive  dependencies  CustAddress ,  ShipAddress , Phone1, Phone2  ជា  Transitive  dependencies  ​
Many-To-Many Relationship 3 1 Customers សូមបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចរូបភាព 2 InvoiceDetail Items ក្នុងតារាង  Invoices  ត្រង់  Column:  CustomerID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup ​  Wizard  យកតារាង  Customers   ដោយរើសយក  CustomerName -  ក្នុងតារាង  InvoiceDetail  ត្រង់ ​ Column:  ItemID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup Wizard  យកតារាង  Items   ដោយរើសយក  ItemName 4 សូមបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចរូបភាព 7 8 5 6 Items Invoice
Customers Invoices InvoiceDetail Items 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 2 CustomerID : Invoices
Customers Invoices InvoiceDetail Items Invoices នេះជា  Junction Table  ដោយបញ្ចាក់អត្ថន័យថា វិក័យប័ត្រមួយអាចមានទំនិញច្រើនមុខនៅក្នុងនោះ ហើយសំរាប់ទំនិញនិមួយៗអាចមាននៅក្នុងច្រើនវិក័យប័ត្រផ្សេងៗពីគ្នាដែរ។ InvoiceDetail
  103 Practical Learning Suppose that you have table Project that does not in Normalization(  unnormalized  table) as figure below  Please Derive to 1NF, 2NF and 3NF Relation, Explain. Mapping from 3NF to ERD
Not in normal Form Here is repeating group
1NF
A B C D E F Full Dependency C, D E is Partial Dependency 2NF_EmpWorkOn table is no partial dependency so this table is in 2NF. 2NF Already in 1NF 2NF only applies to tables with composite primary keys. And  not allow Partial Dependency ​  attribute(Columns). Keep  Full Dependent attribute (non key attribute dependent on the Composite primary key.  A B F B C D E 1NF 2NF មាន  Partial Dependency  គឺធ្វើអោយពិបាកបញ្ចូល ពត៌មានបុគ្គលិកដដែលៗ។
Third Normal Form (3NF) A* B C Convert to A* B B* C It is in the 1NF and Second Normal form. And, it doesn't have Transitive Dependency. Attribute  C  is transitive dependencies A* B* C D VS 2NF 3NF Attribute   D   is full dependent on the  key . Attribute   C   is partially dependent  on the key  A* B* D B* C Convert to 2NF >Already in 1NF >2NF only applies to tables with composite primary keys.  And , it should not have Partial Dependency. >Keep fully dependent on the Composite primary key. 
2NF A B C D E F Full Dependency E is Transitive dependency A B C D F D E 3NF
A B C D E F Full Dependency E is Transitive dependency A B C D F D E
1 5 4 2 3 បញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យ
1 7 ត្រង់  Column:  DepartmentID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup  យក  DepartmentName   ចេញពី​  table: ​   Departments 5 ត្រង់  Column:  ProjectManagerID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup ​ យក   EmployeeName   ចេញពី  Table:  Employees ត្រង់  Column:   EmployeeID   សូមធ្វើ  Lookup ​ យក   EmployeeName   ចេញពី  Table:  Employees   6 8 2 3 បញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យ 4
សូមធ្វើការភ្ជាប់  Relationship  តាមរូបភាពខាងក្រោម
1 2 2 1 សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form: Employee   ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យបុក្គលិក​ តាមរូបភាពខាងក្រោម សូមបញ្ចូលទិន្នន័យដូចខាងក្រោម
សូមបង្កើត  Report:  EmployeeList    ដូចរូបខាងក្រោម 1 2 សូមបង្កើត  Button:  Preview List  ដូចរូបនេះ   ដើម្បីបើក  Report  ខាងលើ ( EmployeeList )
សូមបង្កើត  Report:  Employee Profile   ដូចខាងក្រោម 3 4 សូមបង្កើត  Button:  Preview   ដូចរូបខាងក្រោម ដើម្បីបើក  Report  ខាងលើ  (  EmployeeProfile   )
1 1 2 3 3 4 2 2 4 សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form:  Projects_And_ProjectWorkOn    ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យគំរោងនិងយបុក្គលិកដែលចូលរូមធ្វើគំរោង( Project) ដោយមានម៉ោងផ្សេងៗពីគ្នា   ​  សូមពិនិត្យតាមរូបភាពខាងក្រោម
សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form:  Projects_And_ProjectWorkOn    ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យគំរោងនិងយបុក្គលិកដែលចូលរូមធ្វើគំរោង( Project) ដោយមានម៉ោងផ្សេងៗពីគ្នា   ​ សូមពិនិត្យតាមរូបភាពមួយនេះ 1 3 4 2 2 2 4 3 1
សូមធ្វើការបង្កើត  Form:  Projects_And_ProjectWorkOn    ដើម្បីបញ្ចូលទន្នន័យគំរោងនិងយបុក្គលិកដែលចូលរូមធ្វើគំរោង( Project) ដោយមានម៉ោងផ្សេងៗពីគ្នា   ​ សូមពិនិត្យតាមរូបភាពមួយនេះ
សូមបង្កើត  Report  ដូចខាងក្រោម
សូមបង្កើត  Report  ដូចខាងលើ
  123

--- FILE: Chapter06_BasicSQL_V2.pptx ---
Date time   Manipulation Functions Manipulate  Date time SELECT  DATEDIFF (day, ‘1900-01-01’, GETDATE()) AS days --Here is your result: days ----------- 38274
1 2 FrameSearch TextSearch 3 ListData 1 2 3 នៅលើ  Controls  និមួយៗ សូមកំណត់ឈ្មោះដូចខាងក្រោម៖
Private Sub  TextSearch_Change () If  FrameSearch  = 1 Then      ListData.RowSource  = "Select   *   from students where  latin   like   ' "   &   TextSearch.Text    &   "% ' " ElseIf   FrameSearch  = 2 Then      ListData.RowSource  = " Select   *   from  students where  latin   like   ' %"   &   TextSearch.Text    &    " ' " ElseIf   FrameSearch  = 3 Then      ListData.RowSource  = " Select  *   from students where  latin   like   ' %"   &  TextSearch.Text    &  "% ' " Else      ListData.RowSource  = " Select   *   from  students where  HomePhone   like   ' %"   &   TextSearch.Text    & "% ' " End  If End  Sub ត្រង់  Event: On Change  សូមសរសេរកូដដូចខាងក្រោម៖
Using the IS NULL Operator Test for null values with the IS NULL operator.       SELECT  ename, mgr        FROM    emp        WHERE   mgr IS NULL; ENAME            MGR ---------- --------- KING
Using the IS NULL Operator Test for null values with the IS NULL operator.
Using the IS NULL Operator Test for null values with the IS NULL operator.
Using the IS NULL Operator Test for null values with the IS NULL operator.
Using the LIKE Operator You can combine pattern-matching characters.       SELECT	ename        FROM	emp        WHERE	ename LIKE ‘ ? A * '; ENAME ----------  MARTIN JAMES    WARD       SELECT	ename        FROM	emp        WHERE	ename LIKE ‘ _ A%'; ENAME ----------  MARTIN JAMES    WARD SQL for MS- Access SQL for MS- SQL Server
Using the LIKE Operator Use the LIKE operator to perform wildcard searches of valid search string values. Search conditions can contain either literal characters or numbers. %  denotes zero or many characters (For MS- Server) .   _  denotes one character  (For MS- Server) .  SELECT	ename   FROM 	emp  WHERE	ename LIKE 'S % ';
Using the LIKE Operator Use the LIKE operator to perform wildcard searches of valid search string values. Search conditions can contain either literal characters or numbers.  *  denotes zero or many characters (For MS Access) .  ?  denotes one character (For MS Access) .  SELECT	ename   FROM 	emp  WHERE	ename LIKE 'S * ';
Comparison Operators Operator = >       >=	 <       <=	 <> Meaning Equal to Greater than  Greater than or equal to  Less than  Less than or equal to Not equal to
Using the Comparison Operators       SELECT ename, sal, comm        FROM   emp        WHERE  sal<=comm; ENAME            SAL      COMM ---------- --------- --------- MARTIN          1250      1400
Other Comparison Operators Operator BETWEEN ...AND... IN(list) LIKE IS NULL Meaning Between two values (inclusive)	 Match any of a list of values  Match a character pattern  Is a null value 
Using the BETWEEN Operator ENAME            SAL ---------- --------- MARTIN          1250 TURNER          1500 WARD            1250 ADAMS           1100 MILLER          1300       SELECT	ename, sal        FROM 	emp        WHERE	sal BETWEEN 1000 AND 1500; Lower limit Higher limit Use the BETWEEN operator to display rows based on a range of values.
Using the IN Operator Use the IN operator to test for values in a list.       SELECT	empno, ename, sal, mgr        FROM 	emp        WHERE	mgr IN (7902, 7566, 7788);     EMPNO ENAME            SAL       MGR --------- ---------- --------- ---------      7902 FORD            3000      7566      7369 SMITH            800      7902      7788 SCOTT           3000      7566      7876 ADAMS           1100      7788
Using the IS NULL Operator Test for null values with the IS NULL operator.
Using the IS NULL Operator Test for null values with the IS NULL operator.
Logical Operators Operator AND OR NOT Meaning Returns TRUE if  both  component conditions are TRUE	 Returns TRUE if  either  component condition is TRUE Returns TRUE if the following  condition is FALSE
Sorting by Column Alias       SELECT   empno, ename, sal*12 annsal        FROM     emp        ORDER BY annsal;     EMPNO ENAME         ANNSAL --------- ---------- ---------      7369 SMITH           9600      7900 JAMES          11400      7876 ADAMS          13200      7654 MARTIN         15000      7521 WARD           15000      7934 MILLER         15600      7844 TURNER         18000 ... 14 rows selected.
Sorting by Multiple Columns The order of ORDER BY list is the order of sort. You can sort by a column that is not in the SELECT list.      SELECT	 ename, deptno, sal        FROM 	 emp        ORDER BY	 deptno, sal DESC; ENAME         DEPTNO       SAL ---------- --------- --------- KING              10      5000 CLARK             10      2450 MILLER            10      1300 FORD              20      3000 ... 14 rows selected.
Summary SELECT		[DISTINCT] {*|  column  [ alias ], ...} FROM 		 table [WHERE		 condition(s) ] [ORDER BY	{ column, expr, alias } [ASC|DESC]];
Aggregating Data  Using Group Functions   3
Objectives After completing this lesson, you should be able to  do the following: Identify the available group functions Describe the use of group functions Group data using the  GROUP BY  clause Include or exclude grouped rows by using the  HAVING  clause
Sorting in Descending Order       SELECT  	 ename, job, deptno, hiredate        FROM    	 emp        ORDER BY hiredate DESC; ENAME      JOB          DEPTNO HIREDATE ---------- --------- --------- --------- ADAMS      CLERK            20 12-JAN-83 SCOTT      ANALYST          20 09-DEC-82 MILLER     CLERK            10 23-JAN-82 JAMES      CLERK            30 03-DEC-81 FORD       ANALYST          20 03-DEC-81 KING       PRESIDENT        10 17-NOV-81 MARTIN     SALESMAN         30 28-SEP-81 ... 14 rows selected.
ORDER BY Clause Sort rows with the ORDER BY clause ASC: ascending order, default DESC: descending order The ORDER BY clause comes last in the SELECT statement.       SELECT  	 ename, job, deptno, hiredate        FROM    	 emp        ORDER BY hiredate; ENAME      JOB          DEPTNO HIREDATE ---------- --------- --------- --------- SMITH      CLERK            20 17-DEC-80 ALLEN      SALESMAN         30 20-FEB-81 ... 14 rows selected.
Rules of Precedence ENAME      JOB             SAL ---------- --------- --------- KING       PRESIDENT      5000 ALLEN      SALESMAN       1600 Use parentheses to force priority.       SELECT   ename, job, sal        FROM     emp        WHERE    (job='SALESMAN'        OR       job='PRESIDENT')        AND      sal>1500;
Using the AND Operator AND requires both conditions to be TRUE.       SELECT empno, ename, job, sal        FROM   emp        WHERE  sal>=1100        AND    job='CLERK';     EMPNO ENAME      JOB             SAL --------- ---------- --------- ---------      7876 ADAMS      CLERK          1100      7934 MILLER     CLERK          1300
Using the OR Operator OR requires either condition to be TRUE.       SELECT empno, ename, job, sal        FROM   emp        WHERE  sal>=1100        OR     job='CLERK';     EMPNO ENAME      JOB             SAL --------- ---------- --------- ---------      7839 KING       PRESIDENT      5000      7698 BLAKE      MANAGER        2850      7782 CLARK      MANAGER        2450      7566 JONES      MANAGER        2975      7654 MARTIN     SALESMAN       1250      ...       7900 JAMES      CLERK           950      ... 14 rows selected.
Using the NOT Operator       SELECT ename, job        FROM   emp        WHERE  job NOT IN ('CLERK','MANAGER','ANALYST'); ENAME      JOB ---------- --------- KING       PRESIDENT MARTIN     SALESMAN ALLEN      SALESMAN TURNER     SALESMAN WARD       SALESMAN
Rules of Precedence Override rules of precedence by using parentheses. Order Evaluated	Operator     	1	All comparison  		operators 	2	NOT 	3	AND 	4	OR
Rules of Precedence ENAME      JOB             SAL ---------- --------- --------- KING       PRESIDENT      5000 MARTIN     SALESMAN       1250 ALLEN      SALESMAN       1600 TURNER     SALESMAN       1500 WARD       SALESMAN       1250       SELECT ename, job, sal        FROM   emp        WHERE  job='SALESMAN'        OR     job='PRESIDENT'        AND    sal>1500;
Character Strings and Dates Character strings values  and date  are enclosed in single quotation marks.       SELECT	ename, job, deptno        FROM 	emp        WHERE	ename =        ; 'JAMES' Result look like this
Using the WHERE Clause       SELECT ename, job, deptno       FROM   emp         WHERE  job='CLERK'; ENAME      JOB          DEPTNO ---------- --------- --------- JAMES      CLERK            30 SMITH      CLERK            20 ADAMS      CLERK            20 MILLER     CLERK            10
        Using Column Aliases         SELECT ename AS  [ name ] ,  sal salary        FROM   emp; NAME             SALARY ------------- --------- ... SELECT ename   [ Name ] ,        sal*12  [ Annual Salary ] F ROM   emp;   Name          Annual Salary ------------- ------------- ...
SELECT  Ename  as Name, Job, Sal as Salary,  Comm ,  sal+Comm  as [ Net Pay]   from    emp ; Using Column Aliases
Select  ename  as Name, job, SAL,  comm ,  sal +  isnull (comm,0 ) as [Net Pay] from  emp SQL: For SQL Server Using function to convert  null value to any value SELECT  Ename  , Job, Sal,  Comm ,  sal+comm  From  emp Select  ename  as Name, job, SAL,  comm ,  sal+comm   as [Net Pay ]  from  emp
SELECT  Ename  as Name, Job,  Sal ,  comm ,  iif ( isnull ( comm ), sal,sal+comm ) As [Net Pay] from  emp SQL: MS Access Using function to convert  null value to any value SELECT   Ename  as Name , Job,  Sal as Salary,   Comm ,  sal+comm  as [Net Pay] From  Emp
Concatenation Operator Concatenates columns or character strings to other columns  Is represented by  Plus sign  ( + ) Creates a resultant column that is a character expression
Defining a Column Alias Renames a column heading Is useful with calculations Immediately follows column name; optional AS keyword between column name and alias Requires  [ ] or  double quotation marks if it contains spaces
SELECT  Ename  , Job, Sal,  Comm ,   sal+comm    From  emp
SELECT  EmpNo ,  Ename , job, Sal, 12*(sal+100)  from  emp SQL
Arithmetic Expressions Create expressions on NUMBER and DATE data by using arithmetic operators. Operator + - *       /       	 Description Add Subtract  Multiply  Divide
  Using Arithmetic Operators         SELECT ename, sal, sal+300        FROM	emp; ENAME            SAL   (No columns name) ---------- --------- --------- --------- KING            5000      5300 BLAKE           2850      3150 CLARK           2450      2750 JONES           2975      3275 MARTIN          1250      1550 ALLEN           1600      1900 ... 14 rows selected.
Operator Precedence Multiplication and division take priority over addition and subtraction. Operators of the same priority are evaluated from left to right. Parentheses are used to force prioritized evaluation and to clarify statements. * / + _
    Operator Precedence       SELECT ename, sal, 12*sal+100        FROM   emp; ENAME            SAL  (No columns name) ---------- --------- ---------- KING            5000      60100 BLAKE           2850      34300 CLARK           2450      29500 JONES           2975      35800 MARTIN          1250      15100 ALLEN           1600      19300 ... 14 rows selected.
    Using Parentheses       SELECT ename, sal, 12*(sal+100)        FROM   emp; ENAME            SAL  (No column name) ---------- --------- ----------- KING            5000       61200 BLAKE           2850       35400 CLARK           2450       30600 JONES           2975       36900 MARTIN          1250       16200 ... 14 rows selected.
Using the Concatenation Operator       SELECT 	 ename  +  job AS Employees        FROM 	emp; Employees ------------------- KINGPRESIDENT BLAKEMANAGER CLARKMANAGER JONESMANAGER MARTINSALESMAN ALLENSALESMAN ... 14 rows selected.
Using the Concatenation Operator SELECT   ename   + '  as  ' + job as   empDetail  from  emp SQL
Using the Concatenation Operator SELECT  ename +'  as  ' + Job+ '  the salary is '+ sal   as  empDetail  from  emp SQL The result was an error because you took the numeric value plus the letter ( character).
BranchA BranchB SQL Server Union Clause   Select   *   from   BranchA Union Select   *   from   BranchB go ---Result look like this SQL Statement
Restricting and Sorting Data   2
Objectives After completing this lesson, you should be able to do the following: Limit the rows retrieved by a query Sort the rows retrieved by a query
Limiting Rows Using a Selection "…retrieve all employees in department 10"   EMP  EMPNO 	ENAME 	JOB		 ...  DEPTNO        7839	KING	PRESIDENT		      10   7698	BLAKE	MANAGER		      30   7782	CLARK	MANAGER		      10   7566	JONES	MANAGER		      20   ...   EMP  EMPNO 	ENAME 		JOB		 ...  DEPTNO        7839	KING		PRESIDENT		      10   7782	CLARK		MANAGER		      10   7934	MILLER		CLERK		      10
Limiting Rows Selected Restrict the rows returned by using the WHERE clause. The WHERE clause follows the FROM clause. SELECT		[DISTINCT] {*|  column  [ alias ], ...} FROM 		 table [WHERE		 condition(s) ];
Select Distinct job from  emp
Select * from  emp
SELECT Job from  emp ; Select Distinct Job from  emp ; SQL SQL Eliminating Duplicate Rows : Sample 2
Using the Concatenation Operator SELECT  ename +'  as  ' +job+' the salary is '+ cstr ( sal ) as  empDetail  from  emp SQL: MS Access
Using the Concatenation Operator SELECT ENAME + ' is '+ job+  ' the salary is ' +convert(char,  sal ) FROM EMP SQL: For SQL Server
Literal Character Strings A literal is a character, a number, or a date included in the SELECT list. Date and character literal values must be enclosed within single quotation marks. Each character string is output once for each row returned.
          Duplicate Rows The default display of queries is all rows, including duplicate rows. SELECT deptno FROM   emp;    DEPTNO ---------        10        30        10        20 ... 14 rows selected.       
Eliminating Duplicate Rows SELECT DEPTNO from  emp ; Select Distinct DEPTNO from  emp ; SQL SQL Eliminate duplicate rows by using the DISTINCT keyword in the SELECT clause.
What Are Group Functions? Group functions operate on sets of rows to give one result per group. EMPLOYEES The maximum    salary in  the  EMPLOYEES   table. …
Types of Group Functions AVG  COUNT  MAX MIN   SUM
SELECT	[ column ,]  group_function(column), ... FROM		 table [WHERE	 condition ] [GROUP BY	 column ] [ORDER BY	 column ]; Group Functions Syntax
Character Functions Character functions LOWER UPPER LEFT RIGHT  SUBST RING LEN R TRIM , LTRIM Case conversion  functions Character manipulation functions
Conversion  Functions C onversion  character ---here is your result: Select LOWER('SQL Course') LOWERS,UPPER('SQL Course') UPPERS LOWERS                UPPERS ---------------------   ------------------------ sql  server	 SQL SERVER
Conversion  Functions C onversion  character ---here is your result: SELECT  studentID,Lalin,  Lower(Latin ) as [Name in Latin],  Upper(Latin ) as Latins ,Sex,  shift  from students; SQL For MS-SQL Server
Conversion  Functions C onversion  character ---here is your result: SELECT studentID, UCase(Latin) as [Name in Latin], LCase(Latin) as Latins ,Sex,  shift  from students; SQL For MS-Access
Character Manipulation Functions Manipulate character strings SELECT RIGHT(‘ABCDEF’, 3) AS  three_last , LEFT(‘ABCDEF’, 3) AS  three_first --Here is your result: three_last      three_first -------------  ------------ DEF           ABC
Single-Row Functions Conversion String Number Date General Single-row  functions
Single-Row Functions Manipulate data items Accept arguments and return one value Act on each row returned Return one result per row May modify the datatype Can be nested function_name  ( column | expression , [ arg1, arg2,... ])
Two Types of SQL Functions Functions Single-row  functions Multiple-row functions
Private Sub  cmdUpdate_Click () If   ComboJob  = "<<ALL>>"  Then      CurrentDb.Execute  "Update  emp  set  sal = sal +"    &   TextRaise   &  ""      MsgBox  “All Record was updated successfully" Else      CurrentDb.Execute  "Update  emp  set  sal = sal +"  &   TextRaise   & "  where  Job= ' “   &   ComboJob   & " ' "      MsgBox  " Function  was updated successfully" End  If End  Sub ComboJob SELECT DISTINCT  "<<ALL>>”  FROM EMP  Union   SELECT DISTINCT job FROM  emp ; SQL Statement TextRaise
Private Sub  cmdUpdate_Click () Dim DB As  ADODB.Connection Set DB =  CurrentProject.Connection If      ComboJob   = "<<ALL>>" Then  	 DB.Execute  "Update  emp  set  sal = sal +"  &   TextRaise   &  ""     	 MsgBox  "Your update successfully" Else      DB.Execute  "Update  emp  set  sal = sal +"  &   TextRaise   &  “  where Job= ' "  &   ComboJob    &  " ' "     	 MsgBox  "Your update successfully" End If End Sub TextRaise ComboJob
Microsoft SQL Server Functions 4
Objectives After completing this lesson, you should be able to do the following: Describe various types of functions available in SQL Use character, number, and date functions in SELECT statements Describe the use of conversion functions 
SQL Functions Function Input arg 1 arg 2 arg  n Function performs action Output Result value
Character Manipulation Functions Manipulate character strings Select SUBSTRING('ABCDEFG',1,3) AS  first_three ,               SUBSTRING('ABCDEFG',3,2) AS  PartOfString --Here is your result: first_three  	 PartOfString --------------	------------------- ABC		CD
Character Manipulation Functions Manipulate character strings Select MID('ABCDEFG',1,3) AS  first_three ,               MID('ABCDEFG',3,2) AS  PartOfString --Here is your result: first_three  	 PartOfString --------------	------------------- ABC		CD SQL For MS-Access
Character Manipulation Functions Manipulate character strings SELECT LEN(‘ ABCD’) AS  total_length --Here is your result: total_length ------------ 4
RANK FUNCTION select   *   from   VSalaryRank Create    View   VSalaryRank   As SELECT   e . EMPNO ,   e . ENAME , e . JOB ,   e . SAL   as  Salary ,   Rank ()   OVER  ( ORDER   BY   sal   DESC )   AS  [Salary Rank] , Dense_Rank ()   OVER  ( ORDER   BY   sal   DESC )   AS  [Salary Rank2] , ROW_NUMBER ()   OVER  ( ORDER   BY   sal   DESC )   AS  [Numbering]  FROM   emp  e Go
Miscellaneous Functions RANK() OVER (    [PARTITION BY expression, ]    ORDER BY expression (ASC | DESC)  ); CONVERT( desired_datatype , input  parm , [style]) CONVERT(char(10),  getdate (), 101) ISNULL( input  parm ,  return_val_if_null )
Date time   Manipulation Functions Manipulate  Date time SELECT GETDATE() AS  full_date ,  DATENAME( month, GETDATE()) AS  month_name --Here is your result: full_date                             month_name ---------------------------------- ------------------- 2004-07-07 16:50:11.700  July
Date time   Manipulation Functions Manipulate  Date time SELECT NOW() as  [Date],  DATEDIFF ("d", "1900-01-01", NOW()) AS days --Here is your result: SELECT   EName ,  Job,HIRE_DATE,NOW () as  Totay,DATEDIFF  (" yyyy ", HIRE_DATE, NOW()) AS  Years,DATEDIFF  ("M", HIRE_DATE, NOW()) AS Months, DATEDIFF ("d", HIRE_DATE, NOW()) AS days From EMP SQL For MS-Access
Date time   Manipulation Functions Manipulate  Date time SELECT NOW() as  [Date],  DATEDIFF  (Day,  "1900-01-01", GETDATE()  )AS  days --Here is your result: SELECT   EName ,  Job,HIREDATE , GETDATE() as  Totay , DATEDIFF (year, HIREDATE, GETDATE() )AS Years,  DATEDIFF (Month, HIREDATE, GETDATE() ) AS Months, DATEDIFF (day, HIREDATE, GETDATE() )AS days From EMP SQL For MS-SQL Server
RANK FUNCTION RANK() : Assigns the same rank to rows with duplicate values but introduces gaps in the ranking sequence for subsequent rows. DENSE_RANK() : Similar to  RANK() , but  does not leave gaps  in the ranking sequence for rows with the same value. If two rows are ranked 1st, the next row will be ranked 2nd (not 3rd). ROW_NUMBER() : Always assigns a unique sequential number to each row, without any gaps or handling of duplicates
CONVERT styles
CONVERT styles-Example
Character Manipulation Functions Manipulate character strings SELECT ( '*' + '   ABC' + '*') As  NoTrim , ( '*' + LTRIM ('   ABC') + '*') AS  left_trimmed , ( '*' + RTRIM ('ABC    ') + '*') AS  right_trimmed , ( '*' + TRIM ('   ABC    ') + '*') AS  LR_trimmed --Here is your result:
Date time   Manipulation Functions Manipulate  Date time --Here is your result:
Date time   Manipulation Functions Manipulate  Date time SELECT  GETDATE()   as   Totday , DATEADD(month,4,   GETDATE())   as   four_months_ahead , DATEADD(YEAR,4,   GETDATE())   as   four_Years_ahead --Here is your result:
Date time   Manipulation Functions
CONVERT styles-Example
SELECT DISTINCT  "<<ALL>>”  FROM EMP   Union   SELECT DISTINCT job FROM  emp ;
SELECT  DISTINCT  Job  FROM   emp ; 
UPDATE Statement 4 UPDATE stores  SET city = ‘There’, state = ‘CA’ WHERE  stor_id  = ‘TEST’ --------------------------------------------------------------------- UPDATE titles SET price = price / 1.1 WHERE  title_id  LIKE ‘BU%’
Using the  GROUP BY  Clause  The  GROUP BY  column does not have to be in the  SELECT  list. SELECT   AVG(salary) FROM     employees GROUP BY department_id ;
Grouping by More Than One Column EMPLOYEES “Add up the  salaries in  the  EMPLOYEES  table for each job,  grouped by  department. …
SELECT    department_id   dept_id ,  job_id , SUM(salary) FROM     employees GROUP BY  department_id ,  job_id  ; Using the  GROUP BY  Clause  on Multiple Columns
Excluding Group Results The maximum salary per department when it is greater than $10,000 EMPLOYEES …
SELECT	 column ,  group_function FROM		 table [WHERE	 condition ] [GROUP BY	 group_by_expression ] [HAVING	 group_condition ] [ORDER BY	 column ]; Excluding Group Results: The  HAVING  Clause Use the  HAVING  clause to restrict groups: 1.	Rows are grouped. 2.	The group function is applied. 3.	Groups matching the  HAVING  clause are displayed.
SELECT   department_id, AVG(salary) FROM     employees GROUP BY department_id ; Using the  GROUP BY  Clause  All columns in the  SELECT  list that are not in group  functions must be in the  GROUP BY  clause.
SELECT	 column ,  group_function(column) FROM		 table [WHERE	 condition ] [GROUP BY	 group_by_expression ] [ORDER BY	 column ]; Creating Groups of Data:  The  GROUP BY  Clause Syntax Divide rows in a table into smaller groups by using the  GROUP   BY  clause.
Creating Groups of Data  EMPLOYEES The  average salary  in  EMPLOYEES table  for each  department. 4400 … 9500 3500 6400 10033
SELECT AVG(salary), MAX(salary),        MIN(salary), SUM(salary) FROM   employees WHERE  job_id LIKE '%REP%'; Using the  AVG  and  SUM  Functions You can use  AVG  and  SUM  for numeric data.
Using the  MIN  and  MAX  Functions You can use  MIN  and  MAX  for any data type. SELECT MIN( hire_date ), MAX( hire_date ) FROM	  employees;
SELECT COUNT(*) FROM	   Emp WHERE   DeptNo  = 30; Using the  COUNT  Function COUNT(*)  returns the number of rows in a table.
Using the  COUNT  Function COUNT( expr )  returns the number of rows with non-null values for the  expr . Display the number of department values in the  EMPLOYEES  table, excluding the null values. SELECT COUNT(commission_pct) FROM   employees WHERE  department_id = 80;
SELECT COUNT(DISTINCT  department_id ) FROM   employees; Using the  DISTINCT  Keyword COUNT(DISTINCT expr)  returns the number of distinct non-null values of the  expr . Display the number of distinct department values in the  EMPLOYEES  table.
Using the  HAVING  Clause SELECT    department_id , MAX(salary) FROM     employees GROUP BY  department_id HAVING   MAX(salary)>10000 ;
SELECT   job_id, SUM(salary) PAYROLL FROM     employees WHERE    job_id NOT LIKE '%REP%' GROUP BY job_id HAVING   SUM(salary) > 13000 ORDER BY SUM(salary); Using the  HAVING  Clause
Nesting Group Functions Display the maximum average salary.  SELECT   MAX(AVG(salary)) FROM     employees GROUP BY  department_id ;
Private Sub  cmdDelete_Click () Dim  vmsg vmsg  =  MsgBox ("Do you want to delete all employee",  vbYesNo  +  vbCritical )  If  vmsg  =  vbYes  Then 	If Frame15 = 1 Then 	     CurrentDb.Execute  "Insert  into   emp_story  select  *  from employee where ID=" & ID & ""                  CurrentDb.Execute  "Delete  from  employee  where  ID=" & ID & ""                  Form.Requery 	Else 	      CurrentDb.Execute  "Insert  into   emp  _story select  *  from employee"                   CurrentDb.Execute  "Delete  from  employee"                   Form.Requery     	End If End If End Sub
Private Sub  cmdRestore_Click () Dim  vmsg vmsg  =  MsgBox ("Do you want to delete all employee",  vbYesNo  +  vbCritical ) If  vmsg  =  vbYes  Then     If Frame15 = 1 Then          CurrentDb.Execute  "Insert  into  Employee select   *   from  Emp_story   where  ID=" & ID & ""          CurrentDb.Execute  "Delete   from   Emp_story    where  ID=" & ID & ""          Form.Requery    Else         CurrentDb.Execute  "Insert  into   Employee  select  *  from   Emp_Story "          CurrentDb.Execute  "Delete  from   Emp_story "          Form.Requery     End If End If End Sub
UPDATE Statement 1 UPDATE < table name > SET < column > = < value > [,< column > = < value >] [WHERE < restrictive condition >] Update statement use to change one or more records in a table.
UPDATE Statement 2 SELECT * FROM stores WHERE  stor_id  = ‘TEST’ --Here is your result: --depend on pubs database please write SQL Statement stor_id      stor_name     stor_address          city        state    zip ---------- ---------------- --------------------- -------------- --------- -------- TEST      Test  Store  1234 Anywhere  Street Here NY   00319
UPDATE Statement 3 UPDATE stores SET city = ‘There’ WHERE  stor_id  = ‘TEST’ --Let’s update the value in the city column: stor_id   stor_name   stor_address                  city      state   zip ---------- -------------- -------------------------------- ------- --------- ------- TEST  Test  Store    1234 Anywhere Street   There    NY  00319 --The result will be show like this: 
Private Sub  cmdRestore_Click () Dim   vmsg vmsg  =  MsgBox ("Do you want to restore all employee",  vbYesNo  +  vbInformation ) If  vmsg  =  vbYes  Then      CurrentDb.Execute   "Insert into employee select * from  emp_story "      CurrentDb.Execute   "Delete from  emp_story "      Form.Requery End  If End  Sub
Private  Sub   cmdDelete_Click () Dim DB As  ADODB.Connection Set DB =  CurrentProject.Connection Dim   vmsg vmsg  =  MsgBox ("Do you want to delete all employee",  vbYesNo  +  vbInformation ) If   vmsg  =  vbYes   Then      DB.Execute   "Insert  into   emp_story   select  *  from employee"      DB.Execute   "Delete  from  employee"      Form.Requery End  If End  Sub
The DELETE Statement ---The syntax of Delete statement is DELETE < table_name > [WHERE < search condition >] --Example: DELETE from  emp_story ;
SELECT	 column ,  group_function(column) FROM		 table [WHERE	 condition ] [GROUP BY	 group_by_expression ] [HAVING	 group_condition ] [ORDER BY	 column ]; Summary In this lesson, you should have learned how to:  Use the group functions   COUNT ,  MAX ,  MIN ,  AVG Write queries that use the  GROUP BY  clause Write queries that use the  HAVING  clause 
Adding Data with the INSERT Statement 1 The basic syntax for an INSERT statement looks like this: INSERT [INTO] < table>  [( column_list )] VALUES ( data_values )
Adding Data with the INSERT Statement-2 Adding example ID NAME FUNCTION PHONE SALARY Suppose that you have a table call  Employee  as below: Script to insert data to employee table depend on your specific Script to insert data to all columns in  employee  table Insert into employee (ID, [Name],[Function],salary) values(11,’Bopha,’Account',350); insert into employee values(10,'dara','sale','012 888 999',300);
INSERT INTO . . . SELECT Statement Suppose that you have two table:     Employee ID NAME FUNCTION PHONE SALARY 10 Dara Sale 012 888 999 300 11 Bopha Account 350 ID NAME FUNCTION PHONE SALARY Emp_story Emp_story  table do not have data Employee
INSERT INTO . . . SELECT Statement Insert into emp_story Select    *    from employee; --Script to insert data to  emp_story  table by select all data from employee table. --Result in  emp_story  table
  SELECT *     FROM 	 EMP ; SQL Statement Selecting  All  Columns
  Selecting Specific Columns    DEPTNO LOC --------- -------------        10 NEW YORK        20 DALLAS        30 CHICAGO        40 BOSTON SELECT deptno, loc FROM   dept; Table: DEPT SQL Statement
  Selecting All Columns    DEPTNO DNAME          LOC --------- -------------- -------------        10 ACCOUNTING     NEW YORK        20 RESEARCH       DALLAS        30 SALES          CHICAGO        40 OPERATIONS     BOSTON SELECT *  FROM 	dept; Table: DEPT SQL Statement
Introduction to  SQL  Statement Chapter 03
Language for basic database operation (SQL)  SQL Server, Oracle,  MY SQL,  MongoDB ,  PostgreSQL ,… SQL  Language  SQL stand for Structure Query  Language  Back-End SQL Server, Oracle,  MY SQL,  MongoDB ,  PostgreSQL ,… Front-End/Client: .NET, PHP,  laravel ,…
Language for basic database operation (SQL)  Front-End/Client Back-End/Database Server SQL
Data Manipulation Language (DML) Select to retrieve data from  an database Server.  It  is the most common SQL statement. INSERT to add rows into an Oracle table.  UPDATE to change one or more records in a table.  DELETE to remove one or more records from a table.  Data Definition Language (DDL) CREATE create objects DROP remove objects TRUNCATE Is similar with Delete. The TRUNCATE statement simply removes all rows from a table. ALTER alter the definition of objects RENAME change the names of objects <Categories of SQL Statement > (1)   There are three type SQL Statement:
Date time   Manipulation Functions SELECT DATE() as  Totday , DATEADD("m",4, DATE()) as  four_months_ahead , DATEADD("yyyy",4, DATE()) as  four_Years_ahead SQL For MS-Access
Writing  b asic SQL  s tatments of DML 1
Basic SELECT Statement SELECT	{*,  column  [ alias ],...} FROM	 table; SELECT identifies  what  columns. FROM identifies  which  table  or View .
Data Control Language (DCL) GRANT give a privilege (either object or system) to a user, a role, or to all users   REVOKE REVOKE statement is the opposite of the GRANT statement   Commit  Save data to database Rollback Undo transaction <Categories of SQL Statement > (2)  
Objectives After completing this lesson, you should be able to do the following: List the capabilities of SQL SELECT statements Execute a basic SELECT statement Differentiate between SQL statements and SQL*Plus commands
SALGRADE DEPT EMP Understanding sample relation for this practical learning

--- FILE: Chapter07_SelectMultiesTable.pptx ---
Displaying Data  from Multiple Tables Chapter 7 
Objectives After completing this lesson, you should be able to do the following: Write SELECT statements to access data from more than one table using equality and nonequality joins View data that generally does not meet a join condition by using outer joins Join a table to itself
    EMPNO 	DEPTNO 	LOC ----- ------- --------   7839      	10 NEW YORK  7698 	    	30 CHICAGO  7782  	10 NEW YORK  7566  	20 DALLAS  7654 	    	30 CHICAGO  7499  	30 CHICAGO ... 14 rows selected. Obtaining Data from Multiple Tables EMP  DEPT   EMPNO	ENAME	...	DEPTNO ------	-----	...	------   7839	KING	...	    10   7698	BLAKE	...	    30    ...	   7934	MILLER	...	    10 DEPTNO DNAME     	LOC      ------ ----------	--------     10	ACCOUNTING	NEW YORK     20	RESEARCH	DALLAS     30	SALES		CHICAGO     40	OPERATIONS	BOSTON
Inner Join:   This type of join is used to fetch the data among the tables which are common in both the tables. Left Join:   This returns all the rows from the table which is on the left side of the join but only the matching rows from the table which is on the right side of the join. Right Join:   This returns all the rows from the table which is on the right side of the join but only the matching rows from the table which is on the left side of the join. Full Join:   This returns the rows from all the tables on which the join condition has put and the rows which do not match hold null values. Self Join:  Types of SQL Joins:
INNER JOINS Use  sampleDB SELECT * FROM Emp INNER JOIN dept   ON emp.deptno = dept.deptno Go Example1 Result like this
INNER JOINS USE SAMPLEDB SELECT  *  FROM STUDENTS INNER JOIN STUDY ON STUDENTS.STUDENTID = STUDY.STUDENTID GO Example2 Result like this
Insert into invoice values(1,'02-Feb-2015', 1, 1500); Insert into invoice values(2,'02-Feb-2015', 2, 800); Insert into invoice values(3,'02-Feb-2015', null, 600); Insert into invoice values(4,'02-Feb-2015', 1, 900); Select * from Invoice; Create table customers (  custID   int  primary key,  custName   varchar (15)); Insert into customers values(1,'lucky'); Insert into customers values(2,'Star'); Insert into customers values(3,'dragon'); Select * from customers; Create table Invoice ( Invno   int  primary key,  invDate  date,   CustID   int , Amount  number); Practical Learning with join
SELECT      Invoice.InvNo ,  Invoice.INVDate ,  dbo.Invoice.CustID ,  Customer.CustName ,  Invoice.Amount FROM         Customer INNER JOIN  Invoice ON  Customer.CustID  =  Invoice.CustID Customer Invoice
Using Table Aliases Simplify queries by using table aliases.      SELECT  emp.empno ,    emp.ename ,  emp.deptno ,   	    dept.deptno ,  dept.loc      FROM    emp ,  dept      WHERE   emp.deptno = dept.deptno ;      SELECT e.empno,  e.ename, e.deptno,                d.deptno, d.loc      FROM   emp e,    dept d      WHERE  e.deptno= d.deptno;
SELECT      I.InvNo ,  I.INVDate ,  I.CustID ,   C.CustName ,  I.Amount FROM         Customer C INNER JOIN                       Invoice I ON  C.CustID  =  I.CustID Customer Invoice Using Table Aliases
SELECT * from customers C inner join invoice I on  C.custid = I.custid   inner join  invoice_detail  od on  i.InvNo = od.InvNo
INNER JOINS Example3 SELECT     P.product_no ,   P.description ,   C.name FROM       Clients    C   INNER   JOIN   Orders    O   ON   C.client_no   = O.client_no   INNER   JOIN   Order_details    OD   ON   O.order_no   =   OD.order_no   INNER   JOIN   products   P   ON   OD.product_no   =   P.product_no WHERE    (C.name   =   ' Pich   samphors ') Find out the name of  products, which have been sold to ‘ Pich   Samphors ’
OUTER JOINs An OUTER JOIN operation returns all rows that match the JOIN condition, and it may also return some of the rows that don't match, depending on the type of OUTER JOIN used. There are three types of OUTER JOIN: RIGHT OUTER JOIN, LEFT OUTER JOIN, and FULL OUTER JOIN. An OUTER JOIN can be seen as the result of the union of an INNER JOIN and all unmatched rows in The left table in the case of LEFT OUTER JOIN The right table in the case of RIGHT OUTER JOIN
-------------------Left Outer  join-------------------- SELECT      i.InvNo ,  I.INVDate ,  C.CustID ,  C.CustName ,   i.Amount FROM         Customer c Left OUTER JOIN  Invoice i ON  c.CustID  =  i.CustID Customer Invoice
-------------------Right Outer  join-------------------- SELECT      i.InvNo ,  I.INVDate ,  i.CustID ,  C.CustName ,   i.Amount FROM         Customer c Right OUTER JOIN                       Invoice i ON  c.CustID  =  i.CustID Customer Invoice
SELF JOİNS   A self join is a special type of join, in which a certain table is joined to itself. Basically, in a self join, two copies of the same table are merged, generating a result set based on information stored in this table. Generally, self joins are used to represent hierarchies in a table. For example, the Employees table has a column called reportsto, which has a foreign key pointing to the employeeid column in this table. Therefore, if you want to retrieve the manager of any employee, the Employees table must be joined to itself 
---------------------------------Full Join---------------------------------- SELECT      i.InvNo ,  I.INVDate ,  i.CustID ,  C.CustName ,   i.Amount FROM         Customer c Full OUTER JOIN                       Invoice i ON  c.CustID  =  i.CustID Customers Invoice
Joining a Table to Itself SELECT  worker.empno,worker.EName ,  worker.job,worker.mgr , manager.Ename  as Manager, worker.ename ||' works for '|| manager.ename FROM 	 emp  worker,  emp  manager WHERE 	 worker.mgr  =  manager.empno ;
Joining a Table to Itself SELECT  worker.empno,worker.EName ,  worker.job,worker.mgr , manager.Ename  as Manager, worker.ename +' works for  ‘  +  manager.ename FROM 	 emp  worker,  emp  manager WHERE 	 worker.mgr  =  manager.empno ;
CROSS JOINs A CROSS JOIN generates a Cartesian product of the tables specified in the JOIN operation. In other words, the result set of a CROSS JOIN operation contains every possible combination of rows of the tables involved in the query. In particular, if there are n rows in the first table and m rows in the second table, the result set will have n*m rows. These are the two possible ways to specify a CROSS JOIN operation: SELECT * FROM Table1, Table2 SELECT * FROM Table1  CROSS JOIN Table2  

--- FILE: Chapter08_Subquery.pptx ---
Subqueries  
SELECT E.ENAME, E.JOB, E.SAL, E.DEPTNO, D.DNAME, D.LOC FROM EMP E INNER JOIN DEPT D ON E.DEPTNO=D.DEPTNO WHERE D.LOC='NEW YORK'
EXISTS and Correlated Subqueries In a correlated subquery, the EXISTS clause is evaluated once for each row in the table of the outer query. Example - Retrieve the names of employees who have dependents Dependent  Information
Subqueries SELECT  * FROM emp WHERE sal = (SELECT sal FROM emp WHERE ename='MARTIN'); SQL:   ស្វែងរក បុគ្គលិក ទាំងឡាយណាដែលមានប្រាក់ខែដូចបុគ្គលិឈ្មោះ  Martin
Subqueries SQL lets you nest queries within one another. The inner query is evaluated first and the result used in the outer query. Example - Find the names of all employees who make the same salary as  MARTIN . USE SampleDB SELECT * FROM emp WHERE sal = 	      (SELECT sal FROM emp 	       WHERE ename='MARTIN');
Example Subquery Using IN Find the names of all employees who work for departments located in  NEW YORK USE SampleDB SELECT * FROM EMP  WHERE DEPTNO IN (SELECT DEPTNO 	FROM DEPT 			WHERE LOC='NEW YORK');
Example Subquery Using IN Find the names of all employees who work for departments located in  NEW YORK
SELECT * FROM DEPT WHERE DEPTNO  IN(SELECT DEPTNO FROM EMP) Example Subquery Using IN,  NOT IN SELECT * FROM DEPT WHERE DEPTNO  NOT  IN(SELECT DEPTNO FROM EMP)
EXISTS and Correlated Subqueries SELECT * FROM emp WHERE EXISTS (SELECT * FROM dependent WHERE emp.empno=dependent.empno); SQL for retrieved  employee information that have dependent
EXISTS Operator A Boolean operator that takes a subquery as an argument Yields TRUE if the subquery produces any output Yields FALSE if the subquery produces no output Cannot be unknown Example - Retrieve the Department that have employees work in. SELECT * FROM DEPT D WHERE EXISTS 	(SELECT * FROM EMP E where e.deptno=d.deptno );
Example Subquery Using IN SELECT * FROM EMP  WHERE DEPTNO IN (SELECT DEPTNO 	FROM DEPT 			WHERE LOC='NEW YORK'); Update Location
UPDATE STUDENT SET YEARS=YEARS+1 WHERE STUDENTID IN(SELECT STUDENTID FROM STUDENTSCORE WHERE TOTALSCORE>=50);